INCOME-TAX ACT, 2025
[30 OF 2025]*
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
Short title, extent and commencement.
1. (1) This Act may be called the Income-tax Act, 2025.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Definitions.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(1) “accountant” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 515(3)(b);
1
[(32) “co-operative society” means a co-operative society registered under the Co-operative 
1. Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026. Prior to its substitution, clause (32) 
(112) “zero coupon bond” means a bond—
Definition of “tax year”.
3. (1) For the purposes of this Act, “tax year” means the twelve months period 
CHAPTER II
BASIS OF CHARGE
Charge of Income-tax.
4. (1) Where any Central Act enacts that income-tax shall be charged for any 
(5) For the income chargeable under this section, income-tax shall be deducted or 
Scope of total income.
5. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the total income of any tax year 
(4) If an income has been included in a person’s total income on the basis that it—
Residence in India.
6. (1) For the purposes of this Act, residential status in India in a tax year of 
(14) For the purposes of this section, “income from foreign sources” means the 
Income deemed to be received and dividend deemed to be income in a tax year.
7. (1) The following incomes shall be deemed to be received in the tax year:—
4. Substituted for “(f)” by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026.
Income on receipt of capital asset or stock-in-trade by specified person from 
specified entity. 
8. (1) Where a specified person receives during the tax year any capital asset or 
Income deemed to accrue or arise in India. 
9. (1) The income referred to in sub-sections (2) to (8) shall be deemed to 
Apportionment of income between spouses governed by Portuguese Civil 
Code. 
10. If a husband and wife are governed by the community of property system 
CHAPTER III
INCOMES WHICH DO NOT FORM PART OF TOTAL INCOME
A.—Incomes not to be included in total income
Incomes not included in total income. 
11. (1) In computing the total income of any person for a tax year under this Act, 
B.—Incomes not to be included in total income 
of political parties and electoral trusts
Incomes not included in total income of political parties and electoral trusts. 
12. (1) In computing the total income of any political party or an electoral trust 
CHAPTER IV
COMPUTATION OF TOTAL INCOME
A.—Heads of income
Heads of income. 
13. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all incomes shall, for the purposes 
(e) Income from other sources.
B.—Salaries
Salaries. 
15. (1) The following income shall be chargeable to income-tax under the 
1. Sum paid by the assessee as 
2. Standard deduction. (a) ` 75000 or the salary, whichever is 
Income not forming part of total income and expenditure in relation to such 
income. 
14. (1) Irrespective of anything to the contrary contained in this Act, for the 
