193. (1) Where the total income of an assessee, being an individual, who is a
resident and an employee of an Indian company engaged in specified knowledge
based industry or service or an employee of its subsidiary engaged in specified
knowledge based industry or service (hereafter in this section referred to as the
resident employee), includes income specified in column B of the Table below, the
income-tax payable shall be the aggregate of income-tax computed at the rate
specified in the column C applied on the corresponding income specified in column B.
Table
Sl.                           Income                           Rate of Income-tax
No.                                                                 payable
A                           B                                          C
1.        Income from dividend on Global Depository                  10%
Receipts of an Indian company engaged in
specified knowledge based industry or service,
Direct Taxes Committee                                                            271
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                   [Sec 190-235]
Sl.                          Income                              Rate of Income-tax
No.                                                                   payable
A                                B                                       C
issued as per such Employees’ Stock Option
Scheme as the Central Government may, by
notification, specify in this behalf and purchased
by him in foreign currency.
2.        Income from long-term capital gains arising            12.5%
from the transfer of Global Depository Receipts
referred to in serial number 1.
3.        Total income as reduced by income referred to       Rates in force.
in serial numbers 1 and 2.
(2) Where the gross total income of the resident employee—
(a) consists only of income by way of dividends in respect of Global
Depository Receipts referred to in sub-section (1) (Table: Sl. No. 1), no
deduction shall be allowed to him under any other provision of this Act;
(b) includes any         income     referred   to   in     sub-section   (1)
(Table: Sl. No. 1 or 2),––
(i) the gross total income shall be reduced by such income; and
(ii) the deduction under any provision of this Act shall be allowed
as if the gross total income as so reduced were the gross total income of
the assessee.
(3) The section 72(6) shall not apply for computation of long-term capital
gains arising out of the transfer of long-term capital asset, being Global Depository
Receipts referred to in sub-section (1) (Table: Sl. No. 2).
(4) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “Global Depository Receipts” means any instrument in the form of a
depository receipt or certificate (by whatever name called) created by the
Overseas Depository Bank outside India or in an International Financial
Services Centre and issued to investors against the issue of,—
(i) ordinary shares of issuing company, being a company listed on
a recognised stock exchange in India; or
(ii) foreign currency convertible bonds of issuing company; or
(iii) ordinary shares of issuing company, being a company
incorporated outside India, if such depository receipt or certificate is
listed and traded on any International Financial Services Centre;
Direct Taxes Committee                                                             272
CH. XIII - DETERMINATION OF TAX IN SPECIAL CASES                  [Sec 190-235]
(b) “information technology service” means any service which results
from the use of any information technology software over a system of
information technology products for realising value addition;
(c) “information technology software” means any representation of
instructions, data, sound or image, including source code and object code,
recorded in a machine readable form and capable of being manipulated or
providing inter-activity to a user, by means of an automatic data processing
machine falling under heading information technology products but does not
include non-information technology products;
(d) “Overseas Depository Bank” means a bank authorised by the
issuing company to issue Global Depository Receipts against issue of
Foreign Currency Convertible Bonds or ordinary shares of the issuing
company;
(e) “specified knowledge based industry or service” means—
(i) information technology software; or
(ii) information technology service; or
(iii) entertainment service; or
(iv) pharmaceutical industry; or
(v) bio-technology industry; or
(vi) any other industry or service, as specified by the Central
Government, by notification;
(f) “subsidiary” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
section 2(87) of the Companies Act, 2013 and includes subsidiary
incorporated outside India.
Tax on certain incomes.
