315. (1) A Hindu family, hitherto assessed as undivided, shall be deemed for
the purposes of this Act to continue to be a Hindu undivided family, except where
and in so far as a finding of partition has been given under this section in respect of
the Hindu undivided family.
(2) Where, at the time of making an assessment under section 270 or
section 271, it is claimed by or on behalf of any member of a Hindu family assessed
as undivided that a partition, whether total or partial, has taken place among the
members of such family, the Assessing Officer shall make an inquiry thereinto after
giving notice of the inquiry to all the members of the family.
(3) On the completion of the inquiry, the Assessing Officer shall
record a finding as to whether there has been a total or partial partition of the
joint family property, and, if there has been such a partition, the date on which it
has taken place.
(4) Where a finding of total or partial partition has been recorded by
the Assessing Officer under this section, and the partition took place during the
tax year,—
Direct Taxes Committee                                                            441
Income–tax Act, 2025                                                  [Sec 302-355]
(a) the total income of the joint family in respect of the period up to the
date of partition shall be assessed as if no partition had taken place; and
(b) each member or group of members shall, in addition to any tax for
which he or it may be separately liable and irrespective of anything contained
against Schedule III (Table: Sl. No. 1), be jointly and severally liable for the
tax on the income so assessed.
(5) Where a finding of total or partial partition has been recorded by the
Assessing Officer under this section, and the partition took place after the expiry of
the tax year, the total income of the tax year of the joint family shall be assessed as
if no partition had taken place, and the provisions of sub-section (4)(b), shall so far
as may be, apply to the case.
(6) Irrespective of anything contained in this section, if the Assessing Officer
finds after completion of the assessment of a Hindu undivided family that the family
has already effected a partition, whether total or partial, the Assessing Officer shall
proceed to recover the tax from every person who was a member of the family before
the partition, and every such person shall be jointly and severally liable for the tax
on the income so assessed.
(7) The provisions of this section shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to
the levy and collection of any penalty, interest, fine or other sum in respect of any
period up to the date of the partition, whether total or partial, of a Hindu undivided
family as they apply in relation to the levy and collection of tax in respect of any
such period.
(8) Irrespective of anything contained in the foregoing provisions
of this section, where a partial partition has taken place after the
31st December, 1978, among the members of a Hindu undivided family
hitherto assessed as undivided,—
(a) a claim that such partial partition has taken place shall not be
inquired into under sub-section (2) and no finding shall be recorded under
sub-section (3) that such partial partition had taken place and any finding
recorded under sub-section (3) to that effect at any time, shall be
null and void;
(b) such family shall continue to be liable to be assessed under this Act
as if no such partial partition had taken place; and
(c) each member or group of members of such family immediately
before such partial partition and the family shall be jointly and severally
liable for any tax, penalty, interest, fine or other sum payable under this
Act by the family in respect of any period, whether before or after such
partial partition.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                            442
CH. XVII - SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO CERTAIN PERSONS            [Sec 302-355]
(9) For the purposes of this section, the several liability of any
member or group of members thereunder shall be computed according to
the portion of the joint family property allotted to him or it at the
partition, whether total or partial and the provisions of this Act shall
apply accordingly.
(10) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “partition” means,—
(i) where the property admits of a physical division, a physical
division of the property, but a physical division of the income without a
physical division of the property producing the income shall not be
deemed to be a partition; or
(ii) where the property does not admit of a physical division, then
such division as the property admits of, but a mere severance of status
shall not be deemed to be a partition;
(b) “partial partition” means a partition which is partial as regards the
persons constituting the Hindu undivided family, or the properties belonging
to the Hindu undivided family, or both.
8. —Profits of non-residents from occasional shipping business
Shipping business of non-residents.
