151. (1) Where, in the case of an individual, being an author resident in
India, the gross total income includes any income, derived by him in the exercise
of his profession, on account of any lump sum consideration for the assignment
or grant of any of his interests in the copyright of any book being a work of
literary, artistic or scientific nature, or of royalty or copyright fees (whether
receivable in lump sum or otherwise) in respect of such book, there shall, as per
and subject to the provisions of this section, be allowed, in computing the total
income of the assessee, a deduction from such income, computed in the manner
specified in sub-section (2).
(2) The deduction under this section shall be equal to the whole of such
income referred to in sub-section (1), or an amount of ₹ 300000, whichever is less.
24 Inserted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
25 Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                             229
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                [Sec 122-154]
(3) Where the income by way of such royalty or the copyright fee is not a
lump sum consideration in lieu of all rights of the assessee in the book, so much
of the income, before allowing expenses attributable to such income, as is in
excess of 15% of the value of such books sold during the tax year shall be
ignored for the purposes of deduction under this section.
(4) In respect of any income earned from any source outside India, so much
of the income shall be taken into account for the purpose of this section as is
brought into India by, or on behalf of, the assessee in convertible foreign exchange
within six months from the end of the tax year in which such income is earned
or within such further period as the competent authority may allow in this behalf.
(5) Deduction under this section shall not be allowed unless the assessee
furnishes a certificate in such form and manner, as may be prescribed,26 duly
verified by any person responsible for making such payment to the assessee as
referred to in sub-section (1), along with the return of income, setting forth such
particulars as may be prescribed.
(6) Deduction under this section shall not be allowed in respect of any
income earned from any source outside India, unless the assessee furnishes a
certificate, in the prescribed form27 from the prescribed authority, along with the
return of income in the prescribed manner.
(7) Where a deduction for any tax year has been claimed and allowed in
respect of any income referred to in this section, no deduction in respect of such
income shall be allowed under any other provision of this Act in any tax year.
(8) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “author” includes a joint author;
(b) “books” shall not include brochures, commentaries, diaries,
guides, journals, magazines, newspapers, pamphlets, text-books for schools,
tracts and other publications of similar nature, by whatever name called;
(c) “competent authority” means the Reserve Bank of India or such
other authority as is authorised under any law in force for regulating
payments and dealings in foreign exchange;
(d) “lump sum”, in regard to royalties or copyright fees, includes an
advance payment on account of such royalties or copyright fees which is not
returnable.
Deduction in respect of royalty on patents.
