165. (1) The arm’s length price in relation to an international transaction or
specified domestic transaction shall be determined by any of the following methods,
being the most appropriate method––
(a) comparable uncontrolled price method;
(b) resale price method;
(c) cost plus method;
(d) profit split method;
(e) transactional net margin method;
(f) such other method as may be prescribed4 by the Board.
(2) The most appropriate method referred to in sub-section (1) shall be,––
(a) selected having regard to the nature of transaction or class of
transaction or class of associated enterprise or functions performed by such
enterprises or such other relevant factors as the Board may prescribe;5
3   Omitted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
4   Rule 78, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
5   Rule 80, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                            243
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                        [Sec 161-177]
(b) applied for determination of arm’s length price in such manner as
may be prescribed.6
(3) The arm’s length price shall be—
(a) in case, only one price is determined by the most appropriate
method,––
(i) the price determined by that method; or
(ii) the price at which the international transaction or specified
domestic transaction has actually been undertaken, if the variation
between the arm’s length price so determined and price at which the
international transaction or specified domestic transaction has actually
been undertaken does not exceed such percentage not exceeding 3% of
the latter, notified by the Central Government in this behalf; or
(b) in case, more than one price is determined by the most appropriate
method, the price determined in such manner as may be prescribed.7
(4) The Assessing Officer, during the course of any proceeding for the
assessment of income, may proceed to determine the arm’s length price in relation
to an international transaction or specified domestic transaction as per
sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) if, on the basis of material or information or document
in his possession, he is of the opinion that—
(a) the price charged or paid in an international transaction or specified
domestic transaction has not been determined as per sub-sections (1), (2) and (3); or
(b) any information and document relating to an international transaction
or specified domestic transaction has not been kept and maintained by the
assessee as per section 171(1); or
(c) the information or data used in determination of the arm’s length
price by the assessee is not reliable or correct; or
(d) the assessee has failed to furnish, within the specified time, any
information or document which he was required to furnish by a notice issued
under section 171(2) and (3).
(5) The Assessing Officer, before determining the arm’s length price under
sub-section (4), shall issue a notice calling upon the assessee to show cause, on the
date and time to be specified in the notice, why the arm’s length price should not be
determined on the basis of material or information or document in the possession of
the Assessing Officer.
(6) The Assessing Officer, on determination of arm’s length price under
sub-section (4), may compute the total income of the assessee having regard to the
arm’s length price so determined.
(7) No deduction shall be allowed 8[* * *] under Chapter VIII in respect of
income by which the total income of the assessee is enhanced after computation of
income under sub-section (6).
6    Rule 79, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
7    Rule 81, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
8    Omitted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                                 244
CH. X - SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO AVOIDANCE OF TAX                    [Sec 161-177]
(8) When the total income of an associated enterprise is computed under
sub-section (6) on determination of the arm’s length price paid to another associated
enterprise from which tax has been deducted or was deductible under the provisions of
Chapter XIX-B, the income of the other associated enterprise shall not be
recomputed by reason of such determination of arm’s length price in the case of the first
mentioned enterprise.
Reference to Transfer Pricing Officer.
