359. (1) The Joint Commissioner (Appeals) or the Commissioner (Appeals)
shall fix a day and place for the hearing of the appeal, and shall give notice of
the same to the appellant and to the Assessing Officer against whose order the appeal is
preferred.
(2) The following shall have the right to be heard at the hearing of the appeal:—
(a) the appellant, either in person or by an authorised representative;
(b) the Assessing Officer, either in person or by a representative.
2    Rule 191, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
3    Rule 192, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                              484
CH. XVIII - APPEALS, REVISIONS AND ALTERNATE DISPUTE RESOLUTIONS       [SEC 356-389]
(3) The Joint Commissioner (Appeals) or the Commissioner (Appeals) may––
(a) adjourn the hearing of the appeal; or
(b) make such further inquiry as he thinks fit, before disposing of any
appeal, or may direct the Assessing Officer to make further inquiry and report
the result of the same; or
(c) allow the appellant to go into any ground of appeal not specified in
the grounds of appeal, if he is satisfied that the omission of that ground from
the form of appeal was not wilful or unreasonable.
(4) The order of the Joint Commissioner (Appeals) or the Commissioner
(Appeals) disposing of the appeal shall be in writing and shall state the points for
determination, the decision thereon and the reasons for the decision.
(5) The Joint Commissioner (Appeals) or the Commissioner (Appeals), where
it is possible, may hear and decide such appeal within one year from the end of the
financial year in which such appeal is filed or transferred to him under
section 356.
(6) On the disposal of the appeal, the Joint Commissioner (Appeals) or the
Commissioner (Appeals) shall communicate the order passed by him to the assessee
and to the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner.
Powers of Joint Commissioner (Appeals) or Commissioner (Appeals).
