45. (1)(a) A deduction shall be allowed for any expenditure, being in the
nature of––
(i) capital expenditure, but not on acquisition of land which is
acquired as such or as part of any property; or
(ii) revenue expenditure,
incurred on scientific research related to the business of the assessee subject
to provisions of this section.
(b) A deduction shall also be allowed under this sub-section in respect of the
aggregate of expenditure (not being in the nature of capital expenditure), related
to business, incurred on—
(i) salary to an employee engaged in such scientific research; or
(ii) purchase of materials used in such scientific research,
25 Rule 28, Form No. 6, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                              92
CH. IV D.- PROFITS AND GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION                     [Sec 26-66]
where such expenditure is incurred within three years immediately preceding the
commencement of business, to the extent certified by the prescribed authority26 as
incurred on such research and such expenditure shall be deemed to have been
incurred in the tax year in which the business is commenced.
(c) For the purposes of this sub-section, the aggregate of capital
expenditure incurred within three years immediately preceding the
commencement of business shall be deemed to have been incurred in the tax
year in which the business is commenced.
(2)(i) A deduction shall be allowed in respect of any expenditure on scientific
research incurred (not being expenditure in the nature of cost of any land or
building) by a company engaged in the business of—
(A) bio-technology; or
(B) manufacture or production of any article or thing, which is not
specified in Schedule XIII,
on in-house research and development facility as approved by the prescribed
authority27, subject to the conditions and manner, as may be prescribed28.
(ii) No deduction shall be allowed under this sub-section to a company
approved under sub-section (3)(b)(ii).
(iii) No deduction shall be allowed in respect of the expenditure mentioned
in clause (i) under any other provision of this Act.
(iv) The expenditure under clause (i) shall be allowed subject to such conditions
and on furnishing of documents in such form and manner, as may be prescribed29.
(v) For the purposes of this sub-section, “expenditure on scientific research”,
in relation to drugs and pharmaceuticals, shall include expenditure incurred on
clinical drug trial, obtaining approval from any regulatory authority under any
Central Act or State Act or Provincial Act and filing an application for a patent under
the Patents Act, 1970.
(3) A deduction shall be allowed for any sum, paid to—
(a)(i) a research association having the object of undertaking
scientific research or to a University, college or institution to be used for
scientific research; or
(ii) a research association having the object of undertaking research
in social science or statistical research or to a University, college or
institution to be used for research in social science or statistical research;
26 Principal Chief Commissioner of Income Tax (Exemptions) in concurrence with Secretary,
DSIR. [Rule 29(1)], Income Tax Rules, 2026.
27 Secretary, DSIR. [Rule 29(2), Form No. 11, 14], Income Tax Rules, 2026.
28 Rule 29(2)(e), Form No. 12, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
29 Rule 29(2)(e) and Audit Report in Form No. 13, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                             93
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                     [Sec 26-66]
(b) a company which is––
(i) registered in India having the main object of scientific
research and development; and
(ii) approved by such authority, for the purposes of this clause
in such manner and subject to such conditions, as may be
prescribed30;
(c)(i) a national laboratory; or
(ii) a University; or
(iii) an Indian Institute of Technology; or
(iv) a specified person,
with a specific direction that the said sum shall be used for scientific research
undertaken under a programme approved in this behalf by the prescribed
authority31.
(4) For the purposes of sub-section (3),––
(a) the expenditure shall be allowed subject to such conditions and
on furnishing of documents in such form and manner, as may be
prescribed32; and
(b) in respect of clause (a) of the said sub-section, only such
association, University, college or other institution shall be eligible for
deduction, which for the time being is approved in the manner and subject to
such conditions, as may be prescribed33, and is specified by the Central
Government, by notification.
(5) The deduction for any sum under sub-section (3) shall not be denied
merely on the ground that subsequent to the payment of such sum by the assessee,
the approval granted to such entities or the programme undertaken by entities as
mentioned in sub-section (3)(c), has been withdrawn.
(6) Where a deduction is allowed for any tax year under this section in respect
of expenditure, represented wholly or partly by an asset, no deduction shall be allowed
under section 33(3) for the same or any other tax year in respect of that asset.
(7) The provisions of section 33(11) in respect of depreciation shall
apply in relation to deductions allowable for capital expenditure under sub-
section (1).
(8) No deduction in respect of the sum mentioned in sub-section (3)(c) shall
be allowed under any other provision of this Act.
30   Rule 35, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
31   Rule 30, Form Nos. 7 to 10, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
32   Rule 31, Form No. 15 and 16, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
33   Rule 32, 33 and 34, Form No. 17, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                            94
CH. IV D.- PROFITS AND GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION                     [Sec 26-66]
(9) If any question arises under this section as to whether, and if so, to what
extent any activity constitutes or constituted scientific research, or any asset is or
was being used, for scientific research, the Board shall refer the question to—
(a) the Central Government, when such question relates to any
activity under sub-section (3)(a), and its decision shall be final;
(b) the prescribed authority, when such question relates to any other
activity other than the activity specified in clause (a), whose decision shall
be final.
(10) When an amalgamating company, in a scheme of amalgamation, sells
or otherwise transfers to the amalgamated company (being an Indian company) any
asset representing capital expenditure on scientific research, the provisions of this
section shall apply to the amalgamated company as they would have applied to
the amalgamating company if the latter had not so sold or otherwise transferred the
asset.
(11) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “National Laboratory” means a scientific laboratory functioning at
the national level under the aegis of the Indian Council of Agricultural
Research, the Indian Council of Medical Research, the Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research, the Defence Research and Development
Organisation, the Department of Electronics, the Department of Bio-
Technology or the Department of Atomic Energy and which is approved as a
National Laboratory by such authority and in such manner, as may be
prescribed;
(b) “salary” has the meaning assigned to it in section 16 read
with section 18 subject to the following modifications:
(i) in section 16, clauses (e) and (j) shall be omitted;
(ii) in section 18, the references to “assessee” shall be construed
as references to “employee of former employee” and the reference
to “his employer or former employer” and “an employer or a former
employer” shall be construed as reference to “the assessee”;
(c) “specified person” means such person approved by the
prescribed authority; and
(d) “land”, for the purpose of sub-section (1)(a)(i), includes any
interest in land.
Capital expenditure of specified business.
