208. (1) The income-tax payable on the total income of an assessee, being an
overseas financial organisation (herein referred to as Offshore Fund), which
includes income specified in column B of the Table below, shall be the aggregate
of income-tax computed at the rate specified in the column C applied on the
corresponding income specified in column B.
Table
Sl.                           Income                           Rate of income-tax
No.                                                                 payable
A                              B                                       C
1.       Income received in respect of units purchased in          10 %
foreign currency.
2.       Long-term capital gains arising from the transfer          12.5%
of units purchased in foreign currency.
3.       Total income as reduced by income referred             Rates in force.
against serial numbers 1 and 2.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                               307
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                  [Sec 190-235]
(2) Where the gross total income of the Offshore Fund—
(a) consists only of income from units or income by way of long-term
capital gains arising from the transfer of units, or both, no deduction shall be
allowed to the assessee under sections 28 to 58, 60 and 61 or section 93(1)(a)
or (e) or under Chapter VIII;
(b) includes any income referred to in clause (a),––
(i) the gross total income shall be reduced by such income; and
(ii) the deduction under Chapter VIII shall be allowed as if the
gross total income so reduced were the gross total income of the
assessee.
(3) For the purposes of this section,––
(a) “overseas financial organisation” means any fund, institution,
association or body, whether incorporated or not, established under the laws
of a country outside India,––
(i) which has entered into an arrangement for investment in India
with any public sector bank or public financial institution or a mutual
fund specified in Schedule VII (Table: Sl. No. 20 or 21); and
(ii) such arrangement is approved by the Securities and Exchange
Board of India, established under the Securities and Exchange Board
of India Act, 1992, for this purpose;
(b) “public financial institution” shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it in section 2(72) of the Companies Act, 2013;
(c) “unit” means unit of,––
(i) a mutual fund specified in Schedule VII (Table: Sl. No. 20
or 21); or
(ii) the Unit Trust of India.
Tax on income from bonds or Global Depository Receipts purchased in
foreign currency or capital gains arising from their transfer.
