222. (1) Irrespective of anything contained in any other provision of this
Act, where a person, out of investments made in a venture capital company or
venture capital fund, receives any income, or any income accrues or arises to
Direct Taxes Committee                                                              319
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                    [Sec 190-235]
him, such income shall be chargeable to income-tax in the same manner as if it
were the income accruing or arising to, or received by, such person, had he made
investments directly in the venture capital undertaking.
(2) 31The person responsible for crediting or making payment of the income
on behalf of a venture capital company or a venture capital fund and the venture
capital company or venture capital fund shall furnish, within such time, as may
be prescribed, to the person who is liable to tax in respect of such income and to
the prescribed income-tax authority, a statement in the prescribed form and
verified in the prescribed manner, giving details of the nature of the income paid
or credited during the tax year and such other relevant details, as may be
prescribed.
(3) The income paid or credited by the venture capital company and the
venture capital fund shall be deemed to be of the same nature and in the same
proportion in the hands of the person referred to in sub-section (1) as it had been
received by, or had accrued or arisen to, the venture capital company or the
venture capital fund, as the case may be, during the tax year.
(4) The provisions of Chapter XIX-B shall not apply to the income paid by
a venture capital company or venture capital fund under this Chapter.
(5) The income accruing or arising to or received by the venture capital
company or venture capital fund during a tax year from investments made in
venture capital undertaking, if not paid or credited to the person referred to in
sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have been credited to the account of the said
person––
(a) on the last day of the tax year; and
(b) in the same proportion in which such person would have been
entitled to receive the income had it been paid in the tax year.
(6) Any income which has been included in total income of the person
referred to in sub-section (1) in a tax year, on account of it having accrued or
arisen in the said tax year, shall not be included in the total income of such person
in the tax year in which such income is actually paid to him by the venture capital
company or the venture capital fund.
(7) Nothing contained in this section shall apply in respect of any income
accruing or arising to, or received by, a person from investments made in a
venture capital company or venture capital fund, being an investment fund
specified in section 224(10)(a).
31 Rule 145, Form No. 74 and Form No. 75, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                                 320
CH. XIII - DETERMINATION OF TAX IN SPECIAL CASES                       [Sec 190-235]
(8) For the purposes of this section, “venture capital company”, “venture
capital fund” and “venture capital undertaking” shall have the meanings respectively
assigned to them in Schedule V (Note 4).
Tax on income of unit holder and business trust.
