478. 9[(1) If a person wilfully attempts in any manner to evade any tax,
penalty or interest chargeable or imposable, or under-reports his income, under
this Act, he shall be punishable—
(a) with simple imprisonment for a term up to two years, or with fine,
or with both, where the amount sought to be evaded or tax on under-
reported income exceeds fifty lakh rupees; or
(b) with simple imprisonment for a term up to six months, or with fine, or
with both, where the amount sought to be evaded or tax on under- reported
income exceeds ten lakh rupees but does not exceed fifty lakh rupees; or
(c) with fine, in any other case.
(2) If a person wilfully attempts in any manner to evade payment of any tax,
penalty or interest under this Act, he shall be punishable —
8   Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
9   Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                                595
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                      [Sec 473-498]
(a) with simple imprisonment for a term up to two years, or with fine, or
with both, where the amount sought to be evaded exceeds fifty lakh rupees; or
(b) with simple imprisonment for a term up to six months, or with fine,
or with both, where the amount sought to be evaded exceeds ten lakh rupees
but does not exceed fifty lakh rupees; or
(c) with fine, in any other case.]
(3) The punishment referred to in this section, shall be without prejudice to
any penalty that may be imposable under any other provision of this Act.
(4) For the purposes of this section, a wilful attempt to evade any tax,
penalty or interest chargeable or imposable under this Act, or the payment thereof,
shall include a case where any person—
(a) has in his possession or control any books of account or other
documents (being books of account or other documents relevant to any
proceeding under this Act) containing a false entry or statement; or
(b) makes or causes to be made any false entry or statement in such
books of account or other documents; or
(c) wilfully omits or causes to be omitted any relevant entry or
statement in such books of account or other documents; or
(d) causes any other circumstance to exist which will have the effect of
enabling such person to evade any tax, penalty or interest chargeable or
imposable under this Act or the payment thereof.
Failure to furnish returns of income.
