8. (1) Where a specified person receives during the tax year any capital asset
or stock-in-trade, or both, from a specified entity in connection with the
dissolution or reconstitution of such specified entity, then the specified entity shall
be deemed to have transferred such capital asset or stock-in-trade, or both, to the
specified person in the year in which such capital asset or stock-in-trade, or both,
are received by the specified person.
(2) Any profits and gains arising from the deemed transfer mentioned in
sub-section (1) by the specified entity shall be—
(i) deemed to be the income of such specified entity of the tax year in
which such capital asset or stock-in-trade, or both, were received by the
specified person; and
(ii) chargeable to income-tax as income of such specified entity under
the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” or under the head
“Capital gains”.
(3) For the purposes of this section, fair market value of the capital asset or
stock-in-trade, or both, on the date of its receipt by the specified person shall be
2   Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                                32
CH. II - BASIS OF CHARGE                                                 [Sec 4-10]
deemed to be the full value of the consideration received or accruing as a result
of such deemed transfer mentioned in sub-section (1).
(4) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this section
and section 67(10), the Board may, with the previous approval of the Central
Government, issue guidelines for removing the difficulty.
(5) Every guideline issued by the Board under sub-section (4) shall be laid
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both houses agree in making any
modification in such guideline or both Houses agree that the guideline, should not
be issued, the guideline shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that guideline.
(6) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “specified entity” means a firm or other association of persons or
body of individuals (not being a company or a co-operative society);
(b) “specified person” means a person, who is a partner of a firm or
member of other association of persons or body of individuals (not being a
company or a co-operative society) in any tax year;
(c) “reconstitution of the specified entity” means, where—
(i) one or more of its partners or members, of such specified
entity ceases to be partners or members; or
(ii) one or more new partners or members are admitted in such
specified entity in such circumstances that one or more of the persons
who were partners or members, of the specified entity, before the
change, continue as partner or partners or member or members after
the change; or
(iii) all the partners or members, of such specified entity
continue with a change in their respective share or in the shares of
some of them.
Income deemed to accrue or arise in India.
