200. (1) Irrespective of anything contained in this Act but subject to the
provisions of Parts A, B, E and this Part (other than sections 199 and 201) of this
Chapter, the income-tax payable for a tax year shall be at the rate of 22%, at the
option of a person being a domestic company, in respect of the total income of such
person computed in the following manner:––
(a) without any deduction under––
(i) section 45(2) or 47(1)(b); or
(ii) Chapter VIII other than provisions of section 146 or 148; or
(iii) sections specified in section 205(1)(a) to (g);
(b) without set off of any loss carried forward or depreciation from any
earlier tax year, if such loss or depreciation is attributable to any of the
deductions referred to in clause (a);
(c) without set off of any loss or allowance for unabsorbed depreciation
deemed so under section 116, if such loss or depreciation is attributable to any
of the deductions referred to in clause (a).
(2) Where the person fails to satisfy the requirements contained in
sub-section (1) in any tax year, the option shall become invalid in respect of the said
tax year and subsequent years and other provisions of the Act shall apply, as if the
option had not been exercised for such tax year and for subsequent years.
4   Rule 136, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                               283
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                       [Sec 190-235]
(3) The loss and depreciation referred to in sub-section (1)(b) and (c) shall be
deemed to have been given full effect to and no further deduction for such loss or
depreciation shall be allowed for any subsequent year.
(4) In case of a person, having a Unit in the International Financial Services
Centre, which has exercised option under sub-section (5), the requirements
contained in sub-section (1) shall be modified to the extent that the deduction as
referred to in section 147 shall be available to such Unit subject to fulfilment of the
conditions contained in that section.
(5) 5The provisions of this section shall not apply unless the option is
exercised by the person in such manner as may be prescribed on or before the due
date specified under section 263(1) for furnishing the return of income and such
option once exercised, shall apply to subsequent tax years.
(6) Once the option under this section has been exercised for any tax year, it
shall not be subsequently withdrawn for the same or any other tax year.
(7) In case of a person, being a domestic company, where the option exercised by it
under section 201, has been rendered invalid due to violation of the conditions contained
in section 205(2)(b) or (c) or (d), such person may exercise the option under this section.
Tax on income of new manufacturing domestic companies.
