402. For the purposes of this Chapter,––
(1) “Administrator” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
section 2(a) of the Unit Trust of India (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2002;
(2) “agricultural land” means agricultural land in India,––
(a) not being a land situated in any area referred to in section 2(22)(iii),
for the purposes of section 393(1) [Table: Sl. No. 3(i)];
(b) including a land situated in any area referred to in
section 2(22)(iii), for the purposes of section 393(1) [Table: Sl. No. 3(iii)];
(3) “an incorrect claim apparent from any information in the statement”
shall mean a claim, on the basis of an entry, in the statement—
(a) of an item, which is inconsistent with another entry of the same
or some other item in such statement;
(b) in respect of rate of deduction of tax at source or rate of collection
of tax at source, where such rate is not as per the provisions of the Act;
(4) “authorised dealer” means a person authorised by the Reserve Bank
of India under section 10(1) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999
to deal in foreign exchange or foreign security;
(5) “banking company” means a banking company to which the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949 applies;
(6) “buyer” for the purposes of provisions in column B of the Table
below means any person as specified in column C but does not include any
person as specified in column D:—
46 Rule 214, Form No. 129, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                                  544
CH. XIX - COLLECTION AND RECOVERY OF TAX                           [Sec 390-430]
Table
Sl. No.      Provisions             Person            Person not to be included
A             B                    C                             D
1.  Purchase         of A person whose total Any person, as the Central
goods referred to sales, gross receipts Government may notify for
in section 393(1) or turnover from the this purpose, subject to
[Table: Sl. No. business carried on conditions as may be specified
8(ii)].             by him exceed ten therein.
crore rupees during
the tax year immedia-
tely preceding the
tax year in which
the purchase         of
goods is carried out.
2.  Sale of goods A            person     who        (a) A public sector
referred to in obtains in any sale, company; or
section      394(1) by way of auction,           (b) the Central or a State
(Table: Sl. Nos. 1 tender or any other Government, and an embassy,
to 5).              mode, goods of the a High Commission, legation,
nature        specified commission, consulate and the
in section 394(1) trade representation, of a
(Table: Sl. Nos. 1 to foreign State; or
5), or the right to          (c) a club; or
receive any such             (d) a buyer in the retail
goods                    sale of such goods purchased
by     him       for   personal
consumption.
3.   Sale of motor A person who                     (a) A person as specified
vehicle or any obtains in any sale, in Sl. No. 2.D(b); or
other        goods goods of the nature         (b) a      local   authority
referred to in specified in section as defined at Schedule III
section     394(1) 394(1)         (Table: (Table: Sl. No. 22); or
(Table: Sl. No. 6). Sl. No. 6).                (c) a       public    sector
company which is engaged
in the business of carrying
passengers.
4.  Remittance under A person remitting             (a) A person as per Sl.
Liberalised         amount under the No. 2.D(a) or Sl. No. 3.D(b);
Remittance          Liberalised                 (b) Any other person as
Scheme referred Remittance Scheme the Central Government may
to      in section of Reserve Bank of notify for this purpose subject
394(1) (Table: Sl. India.                   to such conditions as may be
No. 7).                                     specified therein.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                          545
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                     [Sec 390-430]
Sl. No.         Provisions            Person             Person not to be included
A               B                    C                            D
5.     Sale of overseas     A person who             A person as per Sl. No. 4.D.
tour programme       purchases overseas
package referred     tour    programme
to in section        package.
394(1) (Table:
Sl. No. 8).
(7) “commission or brokerage” includes any payment received or receivable,
directly or indirectly, by a person acting on behalf of another person,––
(a) for services rendered (not being professional services); or
(b) for any services in the course of buying or selling of goods; or
(c) in relation to any transaction relating to any asset, valuable article or
thing, not being securities;
(8) “computer resource”, “internet” and “online game” shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in section 194(2);
(9) “consideration for transfer of any immovable property” shall include all
charges of the nature of,—
(a) club membership fee; or
(b) car parking fee; or
(c) electricity or water facility fee; or
(d) maintenance fee; or
(e) advance fee;
(f) or any other charges of similar nature, which are incidental to transfer
of the immovable property;
(10) “contract” shall include sub-contract;
(11) “designated person”, for the purposes of section 393(1) [Table: Sl.
No. 6 (i)], means—
(a) the Central Government or any State Government; or
(b) any local authority; or
(c) any corporation established by or under a Central Act or State Act or
Provincial Act; or
(d) any company; or
(e) any co-operative society; or
(f) any authority, constituted in India by or under any law, engaged either
for the purpose of dealing with and satisfying the need for housing
accommodation or for the purpose of planning, development or improvement
of cities, towns and villages, or for both; or
(g) any society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or
under any law corresponding to that Act in force in any part of India; or
(h) any trust; or
(i) any University established or incorporated by or under a Central Act
or State Act or Provincial Act and an institution declared to be a university
under section 3 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956; or
Direct Taxes Committee                                                               546
CH. XIX - COLLECTION AND RECOVERY OF TAX                             [Sec 390-430]
(j) any Government of a foreign State or a foreign enterprise or any
association or body established outside India; or
(k) any firm; or
(l) any person, being an individual or a Hindu undivided family or an
association of persons or a body of individuals, if such person,—
(i) does not fall under any of the preceding sub-clauses; and
(ii) has total sales, gross receipts or turnover from business or
profession carried on by him exceeding one crore rupees in case of
business or fifty lakh rupees in case of profession during the tax year
immediately preceding the tax year in which such sum is credited or paid
to the account of the contractor;
(12) “electronic commerce” means the supply of goods or services, or both,
including digital products, over digital or electronic network;
(13) “e-commerce operator” means a person who owns, operates or manages
digital or electronic facility or platform for electronic commerce;
(14) “e-commerce participant” means a person resident in India selling goods
or providing services, or both, including digital products, through digital or
electronic facility or platform for electronic commerce;
(15) “fees for technical services” shall have the meaning as assigned to it in
section 9(7)(b);
(16) “foreign exchange asset” means any specified asset which the assessee
has acquired or purchased with, or subscribed to in, convertible foreign exchange;
(17) “Foreign Institutional Investor” shall have the meaning as assigned to it
in section 210(6)(a);
(18) “goods carriage” shall have the meaning as assigned to it in
section 58(11)(d);
(19) “immovable property” means any land (other than agricultural land) or
any building or part of a building;
(20) “investor” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 221(6)(a),
for the purposes of section 393(1) [Table: Sl. No. 4(iv)] and section 393(2)
(Table: Sl. No. 9);
(21) “licensee or lessee” means any person, other than a public sector
company, who has been granted a lease or a licence or entered into a contract or
otherwise received any right or interest either in whole or in part in any parking lot
or toll plaza or mine or quarry, from the licensor or lessor for the use of parking lot
or toll plaza or mine or quarry for the purposes of business;
(22) “licensor or lessor” means any person who grants a lease or a licence or
enters into a contract or otherwise transfers any right or interest either in whole or
in part in any parking lot or toll plaza or mine or quarry, to another person, other
than a public sector company for the use of such parking lot or toll plaza or mine or
quarry for the purposes of business;
(23) “non-resident Indian” shall have the meaning assigned to it in
section 212(d);
Direct Taxes Committee                                                            547
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                    [Sec 390-430]
(24) “Offshore Banking Unit” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it
in section 2(u) of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005;
(25) “online gaming intermediary” means an intermediary who offers one or
more online games;
(26) “overseas tour programme package” means any tour package which
offers visit to any country or territory outside India and includes expenses for travel
or hotel stay or boarding or lodging or any other expenditure of similar nature or in
relation thereto;
(27) “person responsible for paying” means—
(a) in the case of payments of income chargeable under the head “Salaries”,
other than payments by the Central Government or the State Government––
(i) the employer himself; or
(ii) if the employer is a company, the company itself, including the
principal officer thereof;
(b) in the case of payments of income chargeable under the head
“Interest on securities”, other than payments made by or on behalf of the
Central Government or State Government, local authority, corporation or
company, including the principal officer thereof;
(c) in the case of any sum payable to a non-resident Indian, being any
sum representing consideration for the transfer by him of any foreign
exchange asset, which is not a short-term capital asset, the 47[authorised
person, referred in clause (c) of section 2 of the Foreign Exchange
Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999), responsible]––
(i) for remitting such sum to the non-resident Indian; or
(ii) for crediting such sum to his Non-resident (External) Account
maintained as per the provisions of the Foreign Exchange Management
Act, 1999, and any rules made thereunder;
(d) in the case of furnishing of information relating to payment to a
non-resident, not being a company, or to a foreign company, of any sum,
whether or not chargeable under the provisions of this Act––
(i) the payer himself; or
(ii) if the payer is a company, the company itself including the
principal officer thereof;
(e) in the case of credit, or, as the case may be, payment of any other
sum chargeable under the provisions of this Act––
(i) the payer himself; or
(ii) if the payer is a company, the company itself including the
principal officer thereof;
(f) in the case of credit, or as the case may be, payment of any sum
chargeable under the provisions of this Act made by or on behalf of the Central
Government or the State Government––
47 Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                              548
CH. XIX - COLLECTION AND RECOVERY OF TAX                             [Sec 390-430]
(i) the drawing and disbursing officer; or
(ii) any other person, by whatever name called,
responsible for crediting, or paying such sum;
(g) in the case of a person not resident in India––
(i) the person himself; or
(ii) any person authorised by such person; or
(iii) the agent of such person in India including any person treated
as an agent under section 306;
(28) “professional services” means services rendered by a person in the course
of carrying on legal, medical, engineering or architectural profession or the
profession of accountancy or technical consultancy or interior decoration or
advertising or such other profession as may be notified by the Board for the purposes
of this section, or of section 62;
(29) “rent” means any payment, by whatever name called, under any lease,
sub-lease, tenancy or any other agreement or arrangement for the use of (either
separately or together) any—
(a) land; or
(b) building (including factory building); or
(c) land appurtenant to a building (including factory building); or
(d) machinery; or
(e) plant; or
(f) equipment; or
(g) furniture; or
(h) fittings,
whether or not any or all of the above are owned by the payee, and for the purposes
of section 393(1) [Table: Sl. No. 2(i)], only the payment with reference to assets
mentioned in sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c) shall be treated as rent;
(30) “royalty” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 9(6)(b);
(31) “scrap” means waste and scrap from the manufacture or mechanical
working of materials which is definitely not usable as such because of breakage,
cutting up, wear and other reasons;
(32) “securities” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 2(h)
of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956;
(33) “seller” means––
(a) for the purposes of section 394(1) (Table: Sl. Nos. 1 to 6),—
(i) the Central Government; or
(ii) a State Government; or
(iii) any local authority or corporation or authority established by
or under a Central Act or State Act or Provincial Act; or
(iv) any company or firm or co-operative society; or
Direct Taxes Committee                                                             549
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                  [Sec 390-430]
(v) an individual or a Hindu undivided family, whose total sales,
gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on by
him exceed one crore rupees in case of business or fifty lakh rupees in
case of profession during the tax year immediately preceding the tax year
in which the goods of the nature specified in such serial numbers are
sold;
(b) for the purposes of section 394(1) (Table: Sl. No. 8), a person
who sells overseas tour program package;
(34) “services” for the purposes of section 393(1) [Table: Sl. No. 8(v)],
includes “fees for technical services” and fees for “professional services”, as defined
in this section;
(35) “specified bank” means a banking company as the Central Government
may, by notification, specify;
(36) “specified company” means for the purposes of sections 393(1) [Table:
Sl. No. 4(i)] and 393(2) (Table: Sl. No. 10), a company as referred to in section 2(h)
of the Unit Trust of India (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2002;
(37) “specified person” means––
(a) any person, not being an individual or Hindu undivided family; or
(b) an individual or a Hindu undivided family, whose total sales, gross
receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on by him exceed
one crore rupees in case of business or fifty lakh rupees in case of profession
during the tax year immediately preceding the tax year in which such income
or sum is credited or paid;
(38) “special purpose vehicle” shall have the meaning in Schedule V (Note 2);
(39) “specified senior citizen” means an individual, being a resident in India—
(a) who is of the age of seventy-five years or more at any time during
the tax year;
(b) who is having pension income and no other income except the interest
received or receivable from any account maintained by such individual in the
same specified bank in which he is receiving his pension income; and
(c) has furnished a declaration to the specified bank containing
particulars, in such form and verified in such manner as may be prescribed48;
(40) “specified undertaking” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
section 2(i) of the Unit Trust of India (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2002;
(41) “time deposits” means deposits (including recurring deposits) repayable
on the expiry of fixed periods;
(42) “unit” for the purposes of section 393(1) [Table: Sl. No. 4(iii)] and
section 393(2) (Table: Sl. No. 8) shall have the meaning assigned to it in section
224(10)(c);
(43) “Unit Trust of India” means the Unit Trust of India as referred to in the
Unit Trust of India (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2002;
48 Rule 208, Form No. 125, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                            550
CH. XIX - COLLECTION AND RECOVERY OF TAX                                [Sec 390-430]
(44) “University”, referred in section 392(4), means a University established
or incorporated by or under a Central, State or Provincial Act, and includes an
institution declared under section 3 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956,
to be a University for the purposes of that Act;
(45) “user” means any person who accesses or avails any computer resource
of an online gaming intermediary;
(46) “user account” means account of a user registered with an online gaming
intermediary;
(47) “work” shall include—
(a) advertising;
(b) broadcasting and telecasting including production of programmes for
such broadcasting or telecasting;
(c) carriage of goods or passengers by any mode of transport other than
by railways;
(d) catering;
(e) manufacturing or supplying a product according to the requirement
or specification of a customer by using material purchased from––
(i) such customer; or
(ii) its associate, being a person placed similarly in relation to such
customer as is the person placed in relation to the assessee under the
provisions contained in section 36(3),
but does not include—
(A) manufacturing or supplying a product according to the
requirement or specification of a customer by using material purchased
from a person, other than such customer or associate of such customer; or
(B) any sum referred to in section 393(1) [Table: Sl. No. 6(iii)];
49[(f) supply of manpower to a person to work under his supervision,
control or direction.]
