233. (1) Where there has been an amalgamation of a company with another
company or companies, then, subject to the other provisions of this section, the
provisions relating to the tonnage tax scheme shall, as far as may be, apply to the
amalgamated company, if it is a qualifying company.
(2) Where the amalgamated company is not a tonnage tax company, it shall
exercise an option for tonnage tax scheme under section 231(1) within three months
from the date of the approval of the scheme of amalgamation.
(3) Where the amalgamating companies are tonnage tax companies, the
provisions of this Part shall, as far as may be, apply to the amalgamated company
for such period as the option for tonnage tax scheme which has the longest unexpired
period continues to be in force.
(4) Where one of the amalgamating companies is a qualifying company as on
the 1st October, 2004 and which has not exercised the option for tonnage tax scheme
before the 1st January, 2005, the provisions of this Part shall not apply to the
amalgamated company and the income of the amalgamated company from the
business of operating qualifying ships shall be computed as per the other provisions
of this Act.
(5) Where in a scheme of demerger, the demerged company transfers its
business to the resulting company before the expiry of the option for tonnage tax
scheme, then, subject to the other provisions of this Part, the tonnage tax scheme
shall, as far as may be, apply to the resulting company for the unexpired period, if
it is a qualifying company.
43 Rule 146(e), Form No. 81, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                               337
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                  [Sec 190-235]
(6) The option for tonnage tax scheme in respect of the demerged company
shall remain in force for the unexpired period of the tonnage tax scheme if it
continues to be a qualifying company.
Avoidance of tax and exclusion from tonnage tax scheme.
