413. (1) When an assessee is in default or is deemed to be in default in making
a payment of tax, the Tax Recovery Officer may draw up under his signature a
statement in such form as may be prescribed54 specifying the amount of arrears due
from the assessee (such statement being herein and in sections 414 to 416 referred to
as certificate) and shall proceed to recover from such assessee the amount specified in
the certificate by one or more of the modes mentioned below, as per the rules
prescribed55 in this regard,—
(a) attachment and sale of movable property of the assessee;
(b)attachment and sale of immovable property of the assessee;
56[(c) appointing a receiver for the management of movable and
immovable properties of the assessee.]
(2) The Tax Recovery Officer may take action under sub-section (1), whether
or not proceedings for recovery of the arrears by any other mode have been taken.
(3) The assessee shall not be entitled to dispute the correctness of any
certificate drawn up by the Tax Recovery Officer on any ground.
(4) The Tax Recovery Officer may cancel the certificate if, for any reason,
he considers it necessary so to do, or may correct any clerical or arithmetical
mistake therein.
(5) For the purposes of this section, the movable or immovable property of the
assessee shall include any property—
(a) which has been transferred, directly or indirectly on or after the
1st June, 1973, by the assessee to his spouse or minor child or son’s wife or
son’s minor child, otherwise than for adequate consideration, and which is
held by, or stands in the name of, any of the said persons; and
(b) so far as the movable or immovable property so transferred to his
minor child or his son’s minor child is concerned, it shall, even after the date
of attainment of majority by such minor child or son’s minor child, as the case
53   Rule 226, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
54   Rule 224, Form No. 153, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
55   Rule 225 – Procedure for recovery of tax, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
56   Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                                558
CH. XIX - COLLECTION AND RECOVERY OF TAX                              [Sec 390-430]
may be, continue to be included in the movable or immovable property of the
assessee for recovering any arrears due from the assessee in respect of any
period prior to such date.
Tax Recovery Officer by whom recovery is to be effected.57
