269. (1) The Assessing Officer may, for the purposes of assessment or
reassessment, make a reference to a Valuation Officer to estimate the value,
including the fair market value, of any asset, property or investment and submit a
copy of report to him.
(2) The Assessing Officer may make a reference to the Valuation Officer
under sub-section (1) whether or not he is satisfied about the correctness or
completeness of the accounts of the assessee.
(3) (a) For estimating the value, including the fair market value, of the asset,
property, or investment, the Valuation Officer or any engineer, overseer, surveyor,
or assessor authorized by such Valuation Officer, may, subject to any rules made in
this regard and at such reasonable times, as may be prescribed ,––
(i) enter any land within the limits of the area assigned to the Valuation
Officer; or
(ii) enter any land, building, or other place belonging to or occupied by
any person in connection with whose assessment a reference has been made
to the Valuation Officer; or
(iii) inspect any asset, property, or investment in respect of which a
reference has been made to the Valuation Officer.
(b) The Valuation Officer or any engineer, overseer, surveyor, or assessor,
may require any person in charge of, or in occupation or possession of, such land,
building, or other place or such asset, property, or investment to afford the necessary
facility to:—
(i) survey or inspect such land, building, or other place or such asset,
property, or investment;
(ii) estimate its value; or
(iii) inspect any books of account, document, or record relevant for the
valuation of such asset, property, or investment and gather other particulars
relating to it.
7    Rule 173, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
8    Rule 174, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                            383
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                    [Sec 268-301]
(c) The Valuation Officer, engineer, overseer, surveyor, or assessor shall enter
any land, building or place referred to in clause (a)(ii), or inspect any asset, property,
or investment referred to in clause (a)(iii), with the consent of the person in charge
of, or in occupation or possession of, such land, building, place, or asset, property,
or investment, after providing such person at least two days’ notice in writing of his
intention to do so.
(d) If a person who, under this sub-section, is required to afford any facility to
the Valuation Officer or the engineer, overseer, surveyor, or assessor, either refuses
or evades to afford such facility, the Valuation Officer shall have all the powers as
are vested in a court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, when trying a suit in
respect of the following matters,—
(i) discovery and inspection;
(ii) enforcing the attendance of any person, including any officer of a
banking company, and examining him on oath;
(iii) compelling the production of books of account and other
documents; and
(iv) issuing commissions.
(4) The Valuation Officer shall, estimate the value of the asset, property or
investment after taking into account such evidence as the assessee may produce and
any other evidence in his possession gathered, after giving an opportunity of being
heard to the assessee.
(5) The Valuation Officer may estimate the value of the asset, property or
investment to the best of his judgment, if the assessee does not co-operate or comply
with his directions.
(6) The Valuation Officer shall send the report of the estimate made under
sub-section (4) or (5), to the Assessing Officer and the assessee.
(7) With a view to rectifying any mistake apparent from the record, the
Valuation Officer may amend any report made by him, as per section 287.
(8) The Assessing Officer may, on receipt of the report from the Valuation
Officer, and after giving the assessee an opportunity of being heard, take into
account such report in making the assessment or reassessment.
(9) The Valuation Officer shall send the report referred to in sub-section (6)
within six months from the end of the month in which the reference is made under
sub-section (1).
(10) For the purposes of this Act,––
(a) the Central Government may appoint as many Valuation Officers, as
necessary; and
Direct Taxes Committee                                                               384
CH. XVI - PROCEDURE FOR ASSESSMENT                                         [Sec 268-301]
(b) subject to the rules and orders of the Central Government regulating
the conditions of service of persons in public services and posts, a Principal
Chief Commissioner, or a Chief Commissioner, or a Principal Commissioner
or a Commissioner may appoint as many engineers, overseers, surveyors and
assessors as may be necessary to assist the Valuation Officers in the
performance of their functions.
Assessment.
