36. (1) The provisions of this section shall have effect irrespective of anything
to the contrary contained in any other provision of this Act relating to computation
of income under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.
(2) If the assessee incurs any expenditure for which payment has been or is
to be made to any “specified person”, which in the opinion of the Assessing
Officer is excessive or unreasonable having regard to the––
(a) fair market value of the goods, services or facilities; or
(b) legitimate needs of the business or profession of the assessee; or
(c) benefit derived by or accruing to the assessee therefrom,
so much of the expenditure as considered excessive or unreasonable by him shall not
be allowed as a deduction.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                                75
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                     [Sec 26-66]
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (2) and this sub-section,––
(a) “specified person” shall mean the following,––
(i) in relation to an assessee mentioned in column B of the
Table below, the person referred to in column C thereof:—
Table
Sl.        Assessee                          Specified person
No.
A             B                                      C
1. Individual.                       Any relative of the assessee.
2. Company.                          Any director of the company or
his relative.
3.   Firm.                          Partner of the firm or his relative.
4.   Association of persons.        Member of the association or
his relative.
5.   Hindu undivided family.        Member of the family or his
relative;
(ii) any person being an individual or company or firm or
association of persons or Hindu undivided family having substantial
interest in the business or profession of the assessee, or any director,
partner, member thereof or any relatives of such individual, director,
partner, member or any other company in which the first mentioned
company has substantial interest;
(iii) a company, firm, association of persons, or Hindu
undivided family whose director, partner or member has substantial
interest in the business or profession of the assessee, or any director,
partner or member thereof and their relatives, as the case may be;
(iv) any person carrying on a business or profession, where
assessee, being––
(A) an individual or his relative; or
(B) a company, its directors or their relatives; or
(C) a firm, its partners or their relatives; or
(D) an association of persons, its members or their relatives; or
(E) a Hindu undivided family, its members or their relatives,
has substantial interest in the business or profession of such person;
Direct Taxes Committee                                                             76
CH. IV D.- PROFITS AND GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION                  [Sec 26-66]
(b) a person is deemed to have “substantial interest in the business
or profession” if—
(i) in a case where the business or profession is carried on by a
company, such person is, at any time during the tax year, the
beneficial owner of shares (not being shares entitled to a fixed rate
of dividend whether with or without a right to participate in profits)
carrying not less than 20% of the voting power; and
(ii) in any other case, such person is, at any time during the tax
year, beneficially entitled to not less than 20% of the profits of such
business or profession.
(4) Where in respect of any expenditure incurred by the assessee, any
payment or aggregate of payments made in a day to a person exceeds ₹10000 and
is not made through specified banking or online mode, then the expenditure by
way of such payments shall not be allowed as a deduction.
(5) Where any deduction was made in any preceding tax year for a liability
incurred for any expenditure and payment in respect of such liability is made during
a subsequent tax year and if such payment or aggregate of payments made in a
day to a person exceeds ₹10000 and is not made through specified banking or
online mode, such payment shall be deemed to be the income under the head
“Profits and gains of business or profession” in such subsequent tax year.
(6) For the purposes of sub-sections (4) and (5), the figures “₹10000” shall
be read as “₹35000” in case the payment is made for plying, hiring or leasing of
goods carriages.
(7) The provisions of sub-sections (4) and (5) shall not be applicable in
cases and circumstances, as may be prescribed23, having regard to the nature and
extent of banking facilities available, considerations of business expediency and
other relevant factors.
(8) Nothing (with reference to mode of payment) contained in any
other law in force or in any contract, shall apply in respect of any payment which
has been made through specified banking or online mode, in compliance
of sub-sections (4) to (7), and no plea shall be allowed to be raised, in any suit or
other proceeding on the ground that the payment was not made or tendered in
cash or in mode other than through specified banking or online mode.
(9) No deduction or allowance shall be allowed in respect of marked to
market loss or other expected loss, except as allowable under section 32(1)(h).
Certain deductions allowed on actual payment basis only.
