263. (1)(a) Every person as mentioned below shall, for a tax year, on or
before the due date, furnish a return14 of his income or the income of any other
person in respect of which he is assessable during the said tax year:—
(i) a company;
(ii) a firm;
(iii) a person other than a company or a firm, if his total income or the
total income of any other person in respect of which he is assessable under this
Act during the tax year, without giving effect to the provisions of
Chapter XVII-B or provisions of Schedule VIII (Table: Sl. No. 1) or deductions
allowable under section 82 or 83 or 84 or 85 or 86 or 87 or 88 of
Chapter IV-E or Chapter VIII, as the case may be, exceeded the maximum
amount which is not chargeable to income-tax;
(iv) a specified entity, if its total income without giving effect to the
provisions of section 11 exceeds the maximum amount which is not
chargeable to income-tax;
12 Rule 159(4), Income Tax Rules, 2026.
13 Rule 159(6), Income Tax Rules, 2026.
14 Rule 164, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                            367
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                    [Sec 262-267]
(v) a University, college or other institution as referred to in
section 45(3)(a);
(vi) a business trust;
(vii) an investment fund as referred to in section 224;
(viii) a person who has sustained a loss in the tax year under the head
“Profits and gains of business or profession” or under the head “Capital
gains” and who intends to claim that such loss, or any part thereof, is to be
carried forward as per this Act;
(ix) a person, who is a resident, other than not ordinarily resident, and
who at any time during the tax year,––
(A) holds, as a beneficial owner or otherwise, any asset
(including any financial interest in an entity) located outside India, or
has signing authority in any account located outside India; or
(B) is a beneficiary of any asset (including any financial interest
in an entity) located outside India, except where any income arising
from such asset is includible in the income of person referred to in
item (A);
(x) a person, other than a company or firm, who during the tax year,
fulfils such conditions as may be prescribed;15
(b) the persons referred in clauses (a)(i), (a)(ii), (a)(v), (a)(vi), (a)(vii) and
(a)(ix) shall furnish return on or before the due date regardless of income or loss;
16[(c) for the purposes of this section, “due date” in respect of the persons
mentioned in column B of the Table below, subject to conditions as mentioned in
column C of the said Table, shall be the due date of the financial year
succeeding the relevant tax year as mentioned in column D thereof:
Table
Sl. No.                      Person                        Conditions     Due date
A                            B                               C             D
1.     Assessee, including the partners of the firm   Where the       30th
or the spouse of such partner (if section 10   provisions of   November
applies to such spouse).                       section 172
apply.
2.     (i) Company;                                   Where the       31st
(ii) Assessee (other than a company) whose provisions of       October.
accounts are required to be audited section 172
under this Act or under any other law do not apply.
in force;
(iii) partner of a firm whose accounts are
required to be audited under this Act or
under any other law in force; or the
spouse of such partner (if section 10
applies to such spouse).
15 Rule 163, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
16 Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                              368
CH. XV-RETURN OF INCOME                                            [Sec 262-267]
Sl. No.                       Person                     Conditions    Due date
A                            B                           C              D
3.     (i) Assessee having income from profits Where the           31st
and gains of business or profession provisions of      August.
whose accounts are not required to be section 172
audited under this Act or under any do not apply.
other law in force;
(ii) partner of a firm whose accounts are
not required to be audited under this
Act or under any other law in force or
the spouse of such partner (if section 10
applies to such spouse)
4.     Any other assessee                                          31st July]
(2)(a) The Board may prescribe form for furnishing return of income,
manner of its verification and such other particulars including––
(i) the class or classes of persons who shall be required to furnish the
return in electronic form or otherwise;
(ii) the form and the manner in which the return may be furnished,
whether in electronic form or otherwise;
(iii) the documents, statements, receipts, certificates, audited reports
or any other documents which may not be furnished along with the return in
electronic form but shall be produced before the Assessing Officer on
demand;
(iv) the computer resource or the electronic record to which the
return in electronic form may be transmitted;
(b) the particulars prescribed under clause (a) may also include––
(i) income exempt from tax;
(ii) assets of the prescribed nature and value held by the assessee as a
beneficial owner or otherwise or in which he is a beneficiary;
(iii) bank account and credit card held by the assessee;
(iv) expenditure exceeding the prescribed limit incurred by the
assessee under prescribed heads;
(v) such other outgoings as may be prescribed;
(vi) the report of any audit referred to in section 63 or a copy thereof;
(vii) the particulars of the location and style of the principal place of
the business or profession and all the branches thereof;
(viii) the names and addresses of the partners, if any, in the business
or profession;
(ix) the names of the other members of the association of person or the
body of individuals and the extent of the share of the assessee and the shares
of all such members in the profits of the business or profession and any
branches thereof.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                         369
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                       [Sec 262-267]
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, exempt any class or
classes of persons, from the obligation to file a return of income under this section,
subject to the conditions specified therein.
(4) Any person who has not furnished a return within the time allowed to
him under sub-section (1), may furnish the return for any tax year at any time
within nine months from the end of the relevant tax year, or before the completion
of the assessment, whichever is earlier.
17[(5) If any person, having furnished a return under sub-section (1) or (4),
discovers any omission or any wrong statement therein, he may, subject to the
provisions of section 428(b), furnish a revised return at any time within twelve
months from the end of the relevant tax year, or before the completion of the
assessment, whichever is earlier.]
(6)(a) Any person, whether or not he has furnished a return under
sub-section (1) or (4) or (5) for a tax year, may furnish an updated return18 of his
income or the income of any other person in respect of which he is assessable
under this Act, at any time within forty-eight months from the end of the financial
year succeeding the relevant tax year;
19[(b) (i) the provisions of clause (a) shall continue to apply for a tax year
if any person has sustained a loss in the said tax year and has furnished a
return of loss within the due date specified under sub-section (1) and the updated
return is a return of income or such updated return has the effect of reducing the
loss;
(ii) the provisions of clause (a) shall also apply where an updated return
is furnished by a person for the relevant tax year in pursuance of a notice
issued under section 280 within such period as specified in the said notice and in
such a case, the assessee shall be precluded from filing return in pursuance of
the said notice in any other manner;]
(c) the provisions of clause (a) shall not apply for a tax year for any person,
if––
(i) the updated return is a return of loss for the said tax year 20[except in a
case referred to in sub-section (6)(b)(i)]; or
(ii) the updated return has the effect of decreasing the total tax liability
determined on the basis of return furnished under sub-section (1) or (4) or (5)
for the said tax year; or
17 Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
18 Rule 165, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
19 Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
20 Inserted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                                  370
CH. XV-RETURN OF INCOME                                                 [Sec 262-267]
(iii) the updated return results in refund where no refund was due or
increases the refund due on the basis of return furnished under sub-section (1)
or (4) or (5) for the said tax year; or
(iv) an updated return has already been furnished for the said tax year; or
(v) any proceeding for assessment or reassessment or recomputation or
revision of income under this Act is pending or has been completed for the said
tax year 21[except in a case referred to in sub-section (6)(b)(ii)]; or
(vi) the Assessing Officer is in the possession of information in respect
of such person for the said tax year regarding violation of specified laws and
the same has been communicated to him prior to the date of furnishing of
updated return; or
(vii) information for the said tax year has been received under an
agreement referred to in section 90 or 90A of Income-tax Act, 1961 or
section 159 of this Act in respect of such person and the same has been
communicated to him, prior to the date of furnishing of updated return; or
(viii) any prosecution proceedings under the Chapter XXII have been
initiated for the said tax year in respect of such person, prior to the date of
furnishing of updated return; or
(ix) thirty-six months have expired from the end of the financial year
succeeding the relevant tax year, and any notice to show-cause under
section 281 has been issued in his case, except where an order has been
passed under section 281(3) determining that it is not a fit case to issue
notice under section 280; or
(x) he is such person or belongs to such class of persons, as may be
notified by the Board in this regard;
(d) a person shall also not be eligible to furnish an updated return of income,
where—
(a) a search has been initiated under section 247 or books of account
or other documents or any assets are requisitioned under section 248 in the
case of that person; or
(b) a survey has been conducted under section 253, other than
sub-section (4) of the said section, in the case of that person; or
(c) a notice has been issued under section 294 in pursuance to the
provisions of section 295, to that person,
for the tax year in which such search is initiated or survey is conducted or
requisition is made and any tax year preceding such tax year;
(e) if a person has furnished a return of income under clause (a) for a tax year,
and as a result the loss or any part thereof carried forward under Chapter VII or
unabsorbed depreciation carried forward under section 33(3)(b) or tax credit carried
21 Inserted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                              371
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                         [Sec 262-267]
forward under sections 22[206(2)(e) to (h) and 206(3) and (4)] is to be reduced for
any subsequent tax year, then, an updated return shall be furnished for each such
subsequent tax year.
(7) A return of income furnished under this section, shall be treated as defective
if it is not in conformity with all the conditions as may be prescribed23 and shall be
dealt with in the following manner:––
(a) where the Assessing Officer considers that the return of income
furnished by the assessee is defective, he may intimate the defect to the assessee
and give him an opportunity to rectify the defect within fifteen days from the
date of such intimation or within a further period as may be allowed on an
application made by the assessee in this behalf;
(b) if the defect is not rectified within the period allowed under clause (a),
then the return shall be treated as an invalid return and the provisions of this Act
shall apply as if the assessee had failed to furnish the return;
(c) where the assessee rectifies the defect after the expiry of the period
allowed under clause (a), but before the assessment is made, the Assessing
Officer may condone the delay and treat the return as a valid return.
(8)(a) The provisions of this section shall also apply to a return of income which
is furnished in pursuance of an order passed under section 239(3)(b);
(b) the provisions of this section shall not apply to a specified senior
citizen, as referred to in section 402(39), for the relevant tax year in which tax
has been deducted at source under section 393(1) [Table: Sl. No. 8 (iii)].
(9) For the purposes of this section,––
(a) “beneficial owner”, in respect of an asset means an individual who
has provided, directly or indirectly, consideration for the asset for the
immediate or future benefit, direct or indirect, of himself or any other
person;
(b) “beneficiary”, in respect of an asset means an individual who
derives benefit from the asset during the tax year and the consideration for
such asset has been provided by any person other than such beneficiary;
(c) “specified entity” means––
(i) research association referred to in Schedule III (Table: Sl. No. 23);
(ii) association or institution referred to in Schedule III
(Table: Sl. No. 24);
(iii) person referred to in Schedule VII (Table: Sl. No. 2);
(iv) institution referred to in Schedule III (Table: Sl. No. 25);
(v) any University or other educational institution or any hospital
or other medical institution referred to in Schedule VII
(Table: Sl. Nos. 17, 18 and 19);
22 Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
23 Rule 166, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                                    372
CH. XV-RETURN OF INCOME                                                    [Sec 262-267]
(vi) Mutual Fund referred to in Schedule VII (Table: Sl. Nos. 20
and 21);
(vii) securitisation trust referred to in Schedule III (Table: Sl. No. 26);
(viii) Investor Protection Fund referred to in Schedule III (Table:
Sl. Nos. 28 and 29);
(ix) Core Settlement Guarantee Fund referred to in Schedule III
(Table: Sl. No. 30);
(x) venture capital company or venture capital fund referred to
in Schedule V (Table: Sl. No. 6);
(xi) trade union or association referred to in Schedule III (Table:
Sl. No. 31);
(xii) Board or Authority referred to in Schedule VII (Table: Sl.
Nos. 33 and 40);
(xiii) Body or Authority or Board or Trust or Commission (by
whatever name called) referred to in Schedule III (Table: Sl. No. 36);
(xiv) infrastructure debt fund referred to in Schedule VII (Table:
Sl. No. 46);
(d) “specified laws” shall refer to the Smugglers and Foreign
Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976, or the
Prohibition of Benami Property Transactions Act, 1988, or the Prevention
of Money-laundering Act, 2002, or the Black Money (Undisclosed Foreign
Income and Assets) and Imposition of Tax Act, 2015.
Scheme for submission of returns through tax return preparers.
