314. (1) Irrespective of anything to the contrary contained in section 263, if prior
to the date of order in respect of business reorganisation, any return of income has been
furnished under the provisions of the said section by an entity for any tax year to which
such order applies, the successor shall furnish, within six months from the end of the
month in which the order was issued, a modified return in such form and manner, as
may be prescribed, in accordance with and limited to the said order.
(2) Where the assessment or reassessment proceedings for a tax year to
which the order in respect of the business reorganisation applies,––
(a) have been completed on the date of furnishing of the modified
return as per the provisions of sub-section (1), the Assessing Officer
shall pass an order modifying the total income of the relevant tax year
determined in such assessment or reassessment, in accordance with such
order in respect of business reorganisation and taking into account the
modified return so furnished;
1   Rule 177 and Form No. ITR-A, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                                 440
CH. XVII - SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO CERTAIN PERSONS             [Sec 302-355]
(b) are pending on the date of furnishing of the modified return as
per sub-section (1), the Assessing Officer shall pass an order assessing
or reassessing the total income of the relevant tax year as per the order
in respect of the business reorganisation and taking into account the
modified return so furnished.
(3) Subject to any other provisions of this section, in an assessment or
reassessment made in respect of a tax year under this section, all other
provisions of this Act shall apply and the tax shall be chargeable at the rate or
rates as applicable to such tax year.
(4) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “business reorganisation” means the reorganisation of business
involving the amalgamation or demerger or merger of business of one
or more persons;
(b) “order in respect of business reorganisation” means an order of
a High Court or tribunal or an Adjudicating Authority as defined in
section 5(1) of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016; and
(c) “successor” means all resulting companies in a business
reorganisation, whether or not the company was in existence prior to
such business reorganisation.
7. —Partition
Assessment after partition of Hindu undivided family.
