469. (1) Irrespective of anything contained in this Act, the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner may, whether on his own motion or otherwise, at
his discretion reduce or waive the penalty imposed or imposable under section 439
if he is satisfied that such person,––
11 Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
12 ibid.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                               590
CH. XXI – PENALTIES                                                    [Sec 439-472]
(a) before the Assessing Officer detected any concealment of
particulars of income or of the inaccuracy of particulars furnished in respect
of such income, has made a full and true disclosure of such particulars
voluntarily and in good faith; and
(b) has cooperated in any enquiry relating to the assessment of his
income and has paid or made satisfactory arrangements to pay any tax or
interest payable in consequence of an order passed under this Act in respect
of the relevant tax year.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person shall be deemed to have
made full and true disclosure of his income or of the particulars relating thereto if
the difference between the assessed and returned income does not attract penalties
under section 439.
(3) Irrespective of anything contained in sub-section (1) or (2), if in a case
falling under section 439, the amount of income in respect of which the penalty is
imposed or imposable for the relevant tax year or where such relates to more than
one tax year, and aggregate amount of such income or disclosure thereof for such
years exceeds ₹500000, the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner shall obtain
prior approval from the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or
Principal Director General or Director General, as the case may be, before waiving
or reducing the penalty by order referred to in sub-section (1).
(4) Where an order has been made under sub-section (1) in favour of any
person, whether such order relates to one or more tax years, he shall not be entitled
to any relief under this section in relation to any other tax year at any time after the
making of such order.
(5) The Principal Commissioner or Commissioner may, upon an application
from the assessee, and after recording his reasons for doing so, reduce or waive the
amount of penalty or penalties (whether they relate to one or more tax years)
payable by the assessee or stay or compound any proceeding for the recovery of
any such amount, if––
(a) doing otherwise would cause genuine hardship to the assessee,
having regard to the circumstances of the case; and
(b) the assessee has cooperated in any inquiry relating to the assessment
or any proceeding for the recovery of any amount due from him.
(6) The Principal Commissioner or Commissioner shall take prior approval
from the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or Principal
Director General or Director General, as the case may be, if the aggregate amount
of penalties reduced or waived or compounded, as the case may be, under sub-
section (5), exceeds ₹100000.
(7) An order under sub-section (5), accepting or rejecting the application
under the said sub-section, shall be passed within twelve months from the end of
the month in which such application was received by the Principal Commissioner
or Commissioner.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                             591
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                             [Sec 439-472]
(8) No rejection of application under sub-section (5) shall be made without
giving the assessee an opportunity of being heard.
(9) Every order made under this section shall be final and shall not be called
into question by any court or any other authority.
Penalty not to be imposed in certain cases.
