169. 13[(1) Irrespective of anything to the contrary contained in section 263,
where an income is modified as a result of advance pricing agreement entered into
with any person then, such person shall, or any other person being an associated
enterprise may,—
(a) furnish a return or a modified return in accordance with and
limited to the agreement; and
(b) the time period for furnishing such return or modified return shall
be three months from the end of the month in which the agreement was
entered into,
where the tax years relevant for such return or modified return shall be the years
covered by such agreement.]
(2) Except as provided in this section, all other provisions of this Act shall apply
accordingly as if the modified return is a return furnished under section 263.
(3) Where a modified return is furnished under sub-section (1), and assessment
or reassessment proceedings, in respect of a tax year to which the agreement applies,
were initiated before the filing of such return then,––
(a) if such proceedings have been completed before the filing of such
return, the Assessing Officer shall pass an order modifying the total income of
the relevant tax year; or
13 Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                                249
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                            [Sec 161-177]
(b) if such proceedings are pending on the date of filing of modified
return, the Assessing Officer shall proceed to complete them,
as per the agreement after taking into consideration the modified return so furnished.
(4) Irrespective of anything contained in section 275 or 286 or 296,—
(a) the order in respect of a case falling under sub-section (3)(a) shall be
passed within one year from the end of the financial year in which the modified
return under sub-section (1) is furnished;
(b) in respect of a case falling under sub-section (3)(b), the period of limitation
as provided in section 275 or 286 or section 296 for completion of pending
assessment or reassessment proceedings shall be extended by twelve months.
(5) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “agreement” means an agreement referred to in section 168(1);
(b) the assessment or reassessment proceedings for a tax year shall be
deemed to have been completed where—
(i) an assessment or reassessment order has been passed; or
(ii) no notice has been issued under section 270(8) till the expiry
of the limitation period provided under the said section.
Secondary adjustment in certain cases.
