228. (1) For the purposes of this Part, the relevant shipping income of a
tonnage tax company means—
(a) its profits from core activities referred to in sub-section (3); and
(b) its profits from incidental activities referred to in sub-section (7).
(2) Where the aggregate of all such incomes specified in sub-section (1)(b)
exceeds 0.25% of the turnover from core activities referred to in sub-section (3),
such excess shall not form part of the relevant shipping income for the purposes
of this Part and shall be taxable under the other provisions of this Act.
(3) The core activities of a tonnage tax company shall be—
(a) its activities from operating qualifying ships; and
(b) other ship-related or inland vessel related activities, as the case
may be, as follows:—
(i) shipping contracts in respect of—
(A) earning from pooling arrangements;
(B) contracts of affreightment;
(ii) specific shipping trades, being—
(A) on-board or on-shore activities of passenger ships
37[or inland vessels] comprising       of fares and food and
beverages consumed on-board;
(B) slot charters, space charters, joint charters, feeder
services and container box leasing of container shipping.
(4) For the purposes of sub-section (3)(b)(i),––
(a) “pooling arrangement” means an agreement between two or more
persons for providing services through a pool or operating one or more ships
or inland vessels as the case may be, and sharing earnings or operating profits
on the basis of mutually agreed terms;
(b) “contract of affreightment” means a service contract under which
a tonnage tax company agrees to transport a specified quantity of specified
products at a specified rate, between designated loading and discharging
ports over a specified period.
(5) The Central Government, if it considers necessary or expedient so to
do, may, by notification, exclude any activity referred to in sub-section (3)(b) or
prescribe the limit up to which such activities shall be included in the core
activities for the purposes of this section.
36 Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
37 Inserted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original enactment.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                                      327
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                   [Sec 190-235]
(6) Every notification issued under this Part shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the notification, or both Houses agree that the
notification should not be issued, the notification shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that notification.
(7) The incidental activities shall be the activities which are incidental to
the core activities and as may be prescribed38 for the purpose.
(8) Where a tonnage tax company operates any ship or inland vessels as the
case may be, which is not a qualifying ship, the income attributable to operating
such non-qualifying ship shall be computed under other provisions of this Act.
(9) Where any goods or services held for the purposes of—
(a) tonnage tax business are transferred to any other business carried
on by a tonnage tax company; or
(b) any other business carried on by such tonnage tax company are
transferred to the tonnage tax business,
and, in either case, the consideration, if any, for such transfer as recorded in the
accounts of the tonnage tax business does not correspond to the market value of
such goods or services as on the date of the transfer, then, the relevant shipping
income under this section shall be computed as if the transfer, in either case, had
been made at the market value of such goods or services as on that date.
(10) In sub-section (9), “market value”, in relation to any goods or services,
means the price that such goods or services would ordinarily fetch on sale in the
open market.
(11) Where, in the opinion of the Assessing Officer, the computation of the
relevant shipping income in the manner specified in sub-section (9) presents
exceptional difficulties, he may compute such income on such reasonable basis
as he considers fit.
(12) Where it appears to the Assessing Officer that, owing to the close
connection between the tonnage tax company and any other person, or for any
other reason, the course of business between them is so arranged that the business
transacted between them produces to the tonnage tax company more than the
ordinary profits which might be expected to arise in the tonnage tax business, the
Assessing Officer shall, in computing the relevant shipping income of the
tonnage tax company for the purposes of this Part, take income as may
reasonably be deemed to have been derived therefrom.
(13) In this Part, in case the relevant shipping income of a tonnage tax
company is a loss, then, such loss shall be ignored for the purposes of computing
tonnage income.
38 Rule 146, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                              328
CH. XIII - DETERMINATION OF TAX IN SPECIAL CASES                         [Sec 190-235]
(14) Where a tonnage tax company also carries on any business or activity
other than the tonnage tax business, common costs attributable to the tonnage tax
business shall be determined on a reasonable basis.
(15) Where any asset, other than a qualifying ship, is not exclusively used
for the tonnage tax business by the tonnage tax company, depreciation on such
asset shall be allocated between its tonnage tax business and other business on a
fair proportion to be determined by the Assessing Officer, having regard to the
use of such asset for the purposes of the tonnage tax business and for the other
business.
(16) The book profit or loss derived from the activities of a tonnage tax
company, referred to in sub-section (1), shall be excluded from the book profit
of the company for the purposes of section 206(1)(c).
Depreciation and gains relating to tonnage tax assets.
