149. (1) If the gross total income of an assessee, being a co-operative
society, includes any income referred to in sub-section (2), the sums specified in
19 Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                             226
CH. VIII - DEDUCTIONS TO BE MADE IN COMPUTING TOTAL INCOME           [Sec 122-154]
the said sub-section shall, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this
section, be allowed as deduction in computing the total income of such assessee.
(2) The sums referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the following:—
(a) in the case of a co-operative society engaged in—
(i) carrying on the business of banking or providing credit
facilities to its members; or
(ii) a cottage industry; or
(iii) the marketing of agricultural produce grown by its
members; or
(iv) the purchase of agricultural implements, seeds, livestock or
other articles intended for agriculture for the purpose of supplying
them to its members; or
(v) the processing, without the aid of power, of the agricultural
produce of its members; or
(vi) the collective disposal of the labour of its members; or
(vii) fishing or allied activities, that is to say, the catching,
curing, processing, preserving, storing or marketing of fish or the
purchase of materials and equipment in connection therewith for the
purpose of supplying them to its members,
the whole of the amount of profits and gains of business attributable to any
one or more of such activities;
(b) in the case of a co-operative society, being a primary society
engaged in supplying milk, oilseeds, 20[cotton seed, cattle feed,] fruits, or
vegetables raised or grown by its members to––
(i) a federal co-operative society, being a society, engaged in the
business of supplying milk, oilseeds, 21[cotton seed, cattle feed,] fruits
or vegetables; or
(ii) the Government or a local authority; or
(iii) a Government company, as defined in section 2(45) of the
Companies Act, 2013, or a corporation established by or under a
Central Act or State Act or Provincial Act, engaged in supplying milk,
oilseeds, 22[cotton seed, cattle feed,] fruits or vegetables, as the case
may be, to the public,
the whole of the amount of profits and gains of such business;
20 Inserted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
21 Inserted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
22 Inserted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                           227
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                   [Sec 122-154]
(c) in the case of a co-operative society engaged in activities other
than those specified in clause (a) or (b), (either independently of, or in
addition to, all or any of the activities so specified), that amount of profits
and gains attributable to such activities as does not exceed––
(i) ₹ 100000, if the society is a consumers’ co-operative
society; and
(ii) ₹ 50000, in any other case;
23[(d) in respect of any income derived by the co-operative society
from its investments with any other co-operative society by way of—
(i) interest; or
(ii) dividends,
the whole of such income;]
(e) in respect of any income derived by the co-operative society from
the letting of godowns or warehouses for storage, processing, or facilitating
the marketing of commodities, the whole of such income;
(f) in the case of a co-operative society, not being––
(i) a housing society; or
(ii) an urban consumers’ society (being a society for the benefit of
the consumers within the limits of a municipal corporation, municipality,
municipal committee, notified area committee, town area, or
cantonment); or
(iii) a society carrying on transport business; or
(iv) a society engaged in performing manufacturing operations
with the aid of power,
where the gross total income does not exceed ₹ 20000, the amount of
income by way of interest on securities; any income from house property
chargeable under section 20.
(3) In the case of a co-operative society as referred to in sub-section
(2)(a)(vi) or (vii), provisions of sub-section (1) shall only apply when the
rules and bye-laws of the society restrict the voting rights to the following classes
of its members:—
(i) the individuals who contribute their labour or carry on fishing or
allied activities;
(ii) the co-operative credit societies which provide financial assistance
to the society;
(iii) the State Government.
(4) The deduction under sub-section (1) in relation to the sums specified in
sub-section (2)(a) or (b) or (c) or sub-section (3), shall be allowed with reference
to the income referred to in those sub-sections included in the gross total income
after reducing the deduction under section 138, if the assessee is also entitled to
such deduction.
23 Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                             228
CH. VIII - DEDUCTIONS TO BE MADE IN COMPUTING TOTAL INCOME              [Sec 122-154]
(5) The provision of this section shall not apply to any co-operative bank
which is not a primary agricultural credit society or a primary co-operative
agricultural and rural development bank.
24[(6) For the purposes of this section,––
(a) “consumers’ co-operative society” means a society for the benefit
of the consumers;
(b) “primary agricultural credit society” has the same meaning as
assigned to it in Part V of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949);
and
(c) “primary co-operative agricultural and rural development bank”
means a society having an area of operation confined to a taluk, the
principal object of which is to provide long-term credit for agricultural and
rural development activities.]
25[Deduction in respect of income of federal co-operative
