274. (1) The Assessing Officer may make a reference to the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner at any stage of the assessment or reassessment
proceedings before him, if, having regard to the material and evidence available
with him, he considers that it is necessary to—
(a) declare      an    arrangement     as   an   impermissible      avoidance
arrangement; and
12 Rule 129(1), Form No. 62.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                               392
CH. XVI - PROCEDURE FOR ASSESSMENT                                      [Sec 268-301]
(b) determine the consequence of such an arrangement within the
meaning of Chapter XI.
(2) The Principal Commissioner or Commissioner shall, on receipt of a
reference under sub-section (1), if he is of the opinion that the provisions of
Chapter XI are required to be invoked,––
(a) issue a notice to the assessee, setting out the reasons and basis of such
opinion, for submitting objections, if any; and
(b) provide an opportunity of being heard to the assessee within such
period, not exceeding sixty days, as specified in the said notice.
(3) If the assessee fails to furnish any objection to the notice within the time
specified in such notice issued under sub-section (2), the Principal Commissioner
or Commissioner shall issue such directions as he deems fit in respect of
declaration of the arrangement to be an impermissible avoidance arrangement.
(4) In case the assessee objects to the proposed action, and the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner, after hearing the assessee in the matter, is not
satisfied with the explanation of the assessee, then, he shall make a reference in
the matter to the Approving Panel for the purpose of declaration of the
arrangement as an impermissible avoidance arrangement.
(5) If the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner is satisfied, after having
heard the assessee that the provisions of Chapter XI are not to be invoked, he shall
by an order in writing, communicate the same to the Assessing Officer with a copy
to the assessee.
(6) The Approving Panel , on receipt of a reference from the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner under sub-section (4), shall––
(a) issue such directions, as it deems fit, in respect of the declaration of
the arrangement as an impermissible avoidance arrangement as per the
provisions of Chapter XI; and
(b) specify the tax year or years to which such declaration of an
arrangement as an impermissible avoidance arrangement shall apply.
(7) No direction under sub-section (6) shall be issued unless an opportunity of
being heard is given to the assessee and the Assessing Officer on such directions
which are prejudicial to the interest of the assessee or the interests of the revenue,
as the case may be.
13   Rule 130(1)(a) for time limit.
14   Rule 130(1)(b) for time limit.
15   Rule 129(5), Form No. 64.
16   Rule 129(4), Form No. 63.
17   Rule 131 – Procedure before Approving Panel, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                            393
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                        [Sec 268-301]
(8) The Approving Panel may, before issuing any direction under sub-section (6),—
(a) if it is of the opinion that any further inquiry in the matter is
necessary, direct the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner to make such
inquiry or cause the inquiry to be made by any other income-tax authority and
furnish a report containing the result of such inquiry to it; or
(b) call for and examine such records relating to the matter as it deems fit; or
(c) require the assessee to furnish such documents and evidence as it
may direct.
(9) If the members of the Approving Panel differ in opinion on any point, such
point shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the members.
(10) The Assessing Officer, on receipt of directions of the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner under sub-section (3) or of the Approving Panel
under sub-section (6), shall proceed to complete the proceedings referred to in
sub-section (1) as per such directions and the provisions of Chapter XI.
(11) If any direction issued under sub-section (6) specifies that declaration of
the arrangement as impermissible avoidance arrangement is applicable for any tax
year other than the tax year to which the proceedings referred to in sub-section (1)
pertains, then,––
(a) the Assessing Officer while completing any assessment or reassessment
proceedings relevant to such other tax year shall do so as per such directions and
the provisions of Chapter XI; and
(b) it shall not be necessary for him to seek fresh direction on the issue
for such other tax year.
(12) No order of assessment or reassessment shall be passed by the Assessing
Officer without the prior approval of the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner,
if any tax consequences have been determined in the order under the provisions of
Chapter XI.
(13) The Approving Panel shall, subject to sub-sections (14) and (15), issue
directions under sub-section (6) within six months from the end of the month in
which the reference under sub-section (4) was received.
(14) In computing the period referred to in sub-section (13), the following
shall be excluded:—
(a) the period commencing from the date on which the Approving Panel
first directs the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner for getting the
inquiries conducted through the authority competent under an agreement
referred to in section 159 and ending with the date on which the information
so requested is last received by the Approving Panel or one year, whichever
is less;
18 Rule 132 – Remuneration, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                                   394
CH. XVI - PROCEDURE FOR ASSESSMENT                                  [Sec 268-301]
(b) the period commencing on the date on which the proceeding of the
Approving Panel is stayed by an order or injunction of any court and ending
on the date on which certified copy of the order vacating the stay was received
by the Approving Panel.
(15) If immediately after the exclusion of the period as per sub-section (14),
the remaining period available to the Approving Panel for issue of directions is less
than sixty days, such remaining period shall be extended to sixty days and the period
of six months mentioned in sub-section (13) shall be deemed to have been extended
accordingly.
(16) The directions issued by the Approving Panel under sub-section (6) shall
be binding on—
(a) the assessee; and
(b) the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner and the income-tax
authorities subordinate to him.
(17) No appeal under the Act shall lie against directions issued by the
Approving Panel under sub-section (6), irrespective of anything contained in any
other provision of the Act.
(18) The Central Government shall, for the purposes of this section, constitute
one or more Approving Panels as may be necessary and each panel shall consist of
three members including a Chairperson.
(19) The Chairperson of the Approving Panel shall be a person who is or has
been a judge of a High Court, and—
(a) one member shall be a member of Indian Revenue Service not below
the rank of Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner of
Income-tax; and
(b) one member shall be an academic or scholar having special
knowledge of matters, such as direct taxes, business accounts and international
trade practices.
(20) The term of the Approving Panel shall ordinarily be for one year and may
be extended from time to time up to three years.
(21) The Chairperson and members of the Approving Panel shall meet, as and
when required, to consider the references made to the panel and shall be paid such
remuneration as may be prescribed.
(22) In addition to the powers conferred on the Approving Panel under this
section, the powers which are vested in the Board for Advance Rulings under
section 387 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the Approving Panel.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                          395
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                      [Sec 268-301]
(23) The Board shall provide to the Approving Panel such officials as may be
necessary for the efficient exercise of powers and discharge of functions of the
Approving Panel under this Act.
(24) The Board may make rules for the purposes of the constitution and
efficient functioning of the Approving Panel and expeditious disposal of the
references received under sub-section (4).
Reference to Dispute Resolution Panel.
