302. (1) Where a person dies, his legal representative shall be liable to pay
any sum which the deceased would have been liable to pay if he had not died, in
the like manner and to the same extent as the deceased.
(2) For the purposes of making an assessment (including an assessment,
reassessment or recomputation under section 279) of the income of the deceased
and for the purpose of levying any sum in the hands of the legal representative as
per the provisions of sub-section (1), ––
(a) any proceeding taken against the deceased before his death shall
be deemed to have been taken against the legal representative and may be
continued against the legal representative from the stage at which it stood
on the date of the death of the deceased;
(b) any proceeding which could have been taken against the deceased
if he had survived, may be taken against the legal representative; and
(c) all the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly.
(3) The legal representative of the deceased shall be deemed to be an
assessee for the purposes of this Act.
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (5), (6) and (7), the liability of
a legal representative referred to in sub-section (1) shall be limited to the extent
to which the estate of the deceased is capable of meeting the liability.
(5) Every legal representative shall be personally liable for any tax payable
by him in his capacity as legal representative if, while such liability tax remains
undischarged, he creates a charge on or disposes of or parts with any assets of the
estate of the deceased, which are in, or may come into, his possession.
(6) The liability of a legal representative referred to in sub-section (5) shall
be limited to the value of the asset so charged, disposed of or parted with.
(7) The provisions of sections 304(2) and (5) and 305 shall, in so far as may
be and to the extent to which they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
section, apply in relation to a legal representative.
2. —Representative assessees—General provisions
Representative assessee.
