52. (1) Where an expenditure of the nature specified in column B of the
Table given below is incurred during the tax year, a deduction or part thereof shall
be allowed in equal instalments in each of the successive tax years as mentioned
in column D of the said Table, beginning from the initial tax year specified in
column C thereof.
Table
Sl. No.     Nature of expenditure       Initial tax year       Number of tax
years over which
deduction of
expenditure is
allowable in equal
instalments
A                   B                         C                     D
1.         Expenditure incurred by       Tax year in         Five tax years.
an Indian company, wholly     which      such
and exclusively for the       amalgamation or
purposes of amalgamation      demerger takes
or    demerger    of    an    place.
undertaking.
2.         Amount paid to an            Tax year in          Five tax years.
employee in connection        which       such
with      his    voluntary    payment is made.
retirement as per any
scheme      of   voluntary
retirement.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                         104
CH. IV D.- PROFITS AND GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION                  [Sec 26-66]
A                     B                        C                       D
3.        Capital       expenditure Tax      year   in          Number of years
incurred and actually paid which,—                    commencing from
for acquiring any right to        (a)       the       the initial tax year
use       spectrum       for   business      to       and ending in the
telecommunication              operate telecom        tax year up to
services (spectrum fee).       services       is      which the spectrum
commenced; or          for which the fee is
(b) spectrum        paid remains in
fee is actually        force.
paid,
whichever        is
later.
4.        Capital       expenditure      Tax year in            Number of years
incurred and actually paid     which,—                commencing from
for acquiring any right to           (a)       the    the initial tax year
operate telecommunication         business      to    and ending in the
services (herein referred to      operate telecom     tax year up to
as licence fee).                  services       is   which the licence
commenced; or       for which the fee is
(b) licence     paid remains in
fee is actually     force.
paid,
whichever        is
later.
(2) Where the licence or spectrum referred to in sub-section (1) (Table: Sl.
No. 3 or 4)—
(a) is transferred, and the proceeds of the transfer (so far as they consist
of capital sums) are less than the expenditure though incurred, but remaining
unallowed, a deduction equal to such expenditure remaining unallowed, as
reduced by the proceeds of the transfer, shall be allowed in respect of the tax
year in which the licence or spectrum is transferred;
(b) is transferred, whether in whole or in part, and the proceeds of the
transfer (so far as they consist of capital sums) exceed the amount of the
expenditure though incurred, but remaining unallowed, so much of the excess
as does not exceed the difference between the expenditure incurred to obtain
the licence or spectrum and the amount of such expenditure remaining
unallowed, shall be chargeable to income-tax as profits and gains of the
business in the tax year in which the licence or spectrum has been transferred;
(c) is transferred under clause (b) in a tax year in which the business is
no longer in existence, the provisions of said clause shall apply as if the
business is in existence in that tax year;
Direct Taxes Committee                                                           105
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                    [Sec 26-66]
(d) is transferred, whether in whole or in part, and the proceeds of the
transfer (so far as they consist of capital sums) are equal or greater than the
amount of expenditure incurred remaining unallowed, no deduction for such
expenditure shall be allowed under sub-section (1) in respect of the tax year
in which the licence or spectrum is transferred or in respect of any subsequent
tax year or years;
(e) is sold or otherwise transferred by the amalgamating company or
demerged company, as the case may be, in a scheme of amalgamation or
demerger, to the amalgamated company or resulting company, being an
Indian company,—
(i) the provisions of clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d) shall not apply to
the amalgamating or demerged company; and
(ii) all the provisions of this section shall continue to apply to the
amalgamated or resulting company as it would have applied to the
amalgamating or demerged company, as if the transfer had not taken
place.
(3) Where a part of licence or spectrum referred to in sub-section
(1)(Table: Sl. No. 3 or 4) is transferred in a tax year and sub-section (2)(b) and (c)
does not apply, the deduction to be allowed under sub-section (1) for the
expenditure though incurred but remaining unallowed shall be arrived at by—
(a) subtracting the proceeds of transfer (so far as they consist of capital
sums) from the expenditure remaining unallowed; and
(b) dividing the remainder by the number of relevant tax years which
have not expired at the beginning of the tax year during which the licence or
spectrum is transferred.
(4) No deduction shall be allowed––
(a) for depreciation under section 33(1) to (10) in respect of expenditure
mentioned in sub-section (1) (Table: Sl. No. 3 or 4), where deduction under
this section is claimed and allowed for any tax year;
(b) under any other provision of this Act in respect of the expenditure
mentioned in sub-section (1) (Table: Sl. No. 1 or 2).
(5) In case any deduction has been claimed and granted in respect of an
expenditure referred to in sub-section (1) (Table: Sl. No. 3) in a tax year and
subsequently there is failure on part of the assessee to comply with any of the
provisions of this section, then,—
(a) the deduction shall be deemed to have been wrongly allowed;
(b) the Assessing Officer may, irrespective of any other provisions of
this Act, recompute the total income of the assessee for the said tax year by
making necessary rectification;
(c) the provisions of section 287 shall, so far as may be, apply; and
(d) the period of four years specified in section 287(8) shall be counted
from the end of the tax year in which such failure takes place.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                           106
CH. IV D.- PROFITS AND GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION                   [Sec 26-66]
(6) Where a specified business reorganisation takes place before the expiry
of the period specified in sub-section (1) (Table: Sl. No. 2.D), in case of an
expenditure referred against serial number 2 thereof, then,—
(a) the provisions of this section, as far as may be, shall continue to
apply to the successor entity as they would have applied to the predecessor
entity if such reorganisation had not taken place; and
(b) no deduction shall be allowed to the predecessor entity under this
section for the tax year in which such reorganisation takes place.
(7) For the purposes of this section,––
(a) “actually paid” means the actual payment of expenditure
irrespective of the tax year in which the liability for the expenditure was
incurred according to the method of accounting regularly employed by the
assessee or payable in such manner, as may be prescribed40;
(b) “equal instalments” shall be calculated by taking numerator as 1 and
denominator as the tax years mentioned in column D of the Table in sub-
section (1);
(c) “specified business reorganisation” means––
(i) amalgamation of an Indian company and its undertaking with
another Indian company; or
(ii) demerger of an undertaking of an Indian company to another
company; or
(iii) succession of a firm or proprietorship concern to a company
fulfilling conditions as laid down in section 70(1)(zd); or
(iv) conversion of a private company or unlisted public company
to a limited liability partnership fulfilling conditions laid down in
section 70(1)(ze).
Full value of consideration for transfer of assets other than capital assets in
certain cases.
