425. (1) Where in any tax year, an assessee, liable to pay advance tax
under section 404, other than the assessee mentioned in sub-section (3),
has failed to pay such tax, or the advance tax paid by the assessee on its
current income on or before the date specified in column B of the Table
below, is less than advance tax due on returned income, as specified in
column C, then the assessee shall be liable to pay interest on the amount
of Shortfall of advance tax as specified in column D, at the rate of interest
specified in column E:—
Table
Sl. Due date of Advance tax           Amount of Shortfall Interest
No. Instalment           due on            of advance tax        payable
returned         being advance tax          on
income          due as per column      Shortfall
C, as reduced by          as
advance tax already     specified
paid on or before          in
the date specified in     column
column B               D
A          B               C                      D                 E
1.   15th day of    15% of the tax      Shortfall till 15th day       3%
June.          due on returned     of June.
income.
2.   15th day of    45% of the tax      Shortfall till 15th day       3%
September.     due on returned     of September.
income.
3.   15th day of    75% of the tax      Shortfall till 15th day       3%
December.      due on returned     of December.
income.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                          570
CH. XIX - COLLECTION AND RECOVERY OF TAX                               [Sec 390-430]
A          B                 C                       D                    E
4.   15th day of      100% of the tax Shortfall till 15th day           1%
March.           due on returned of March.
income.
(2) The assessee shall not be liable to pay any interest under sub-section (1),
if the advance tax paid by the assessee on the current income,––
(a) on or before the 15th day of June is 12% or more of the tax due on
the returned income;
(b) on or before the 15th day of September is 36% or more of the tax due
on the returned income.
(3) An assessee who declares profits and gains as per section 58(2)
(Table: Sl. No. 1 or 3) or, who is liable to pay advance tax under section 404, has
failed to pay such tax, or the advance tax paid by the assessee on its current income
on or before the 15th day of March is less than the tax due on returned income, shall
be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of 1% on the amount of shortfall from
the tax due on returned income.
(4) No interest shall be payable under sub-section (1) or (3) in respect of
shortfall in the payment of tax due on returned income, where,––
(a) the shortfall is on account of underestimation of, or failure to estimate
the following income:––
(i) capital gains;
(ii) income as per section 2(49)(n);
(iii) income under the head profits and gains of business or
profession accruing or arising for the first time;
(iv) dividend income; and
(b) the assessee has paid in full, the tax payable on the said income had
such income been part of total income, in any of the remaining instalments of
advance tax, if any, or by the 31st day of March of the tax year.
(5) For the purposes of this section “tax due on the returned income” means
the tax chargeable on the total income declared in the return of income furnished by
the assessee for the tax year in which the advance tax is paid or payable, as reduced
by the amount of—
(a) any tax deducted or collected at source as per the provisions of
Chapter XIX-B on any income which is subject to such deduction or collection
and which is taken into account in computing such total income;
(b) any relief of tax allowed under section 157;
(c) any relief of tax allowed under section 159(1) on account of tax paid
in a country outside India;
Direct Taxes Committee                                                              571
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                     [Sec 390-430]
(d) any relief of tax allowed under section 159(2) on account of tax paid
in a specified territory outside India referred to in that section;
(e) any deduction, from the Indian income-tax payable, allowed under
section 160, on account of tax paid in a country outside India; and
70[(f) any tax credit allowed to be set off as per sections 206(2)(e) to (h)
and 206(3) and (4).]
(6) For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression “dividend” shall have
the meaning assigned to it in section 2(40), but shall not include sub-clause (e)
thereof.
Interest on excess refund.
