63. (1) Every person, carrying on the business or profession fulfilling any of
the conditions specified in column B of the Table below, shall get his accounts of
the tax year audited by an accountant, before the specified date.
Table
Sl. No.            Conditions for getting books of account audited
A                                            B
1.       Every person––
(a) carrying on business shall, if his total sales, turnover or gross
receipts, as the case may be, in business exceed or exceeds one crore
rupees in any tax year, subject to the provisions of clause (b);
(b) In case of a person whose—
(i) aggregate of all amounts received including amount
received for sales, turnover or gross receipts during the tax year,
in cash, does not exceed 5% of the said amount; and
(ii) aggregate of all payments made including amount
incurred for expenditure, in cash, during the tax year does not
exceed 5% of the said payment,
clause (a) shall have effect as if for the words “one crore rupees”, the
words “ten crore rupees” had been substituted;
(c) carrying on profession shall, if his gross receipts in profession
exceed fifty lakh rupees in any tax year.
2.          If the person is carrying on business or profession, referred to in
section 58(2) or 61(2) (Table: Sl. No. 4 and 5) and the profits and
gains from such business or profession are claimed to be lower than
the deemed profits as referred to in the said sections.
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply where profits and gains of
business or profession, declared by the assessee are as per section 58(2) or 61(2).
(3) The assessee shall furnish by the specified date, the report of such audit
in such form, duly signed and verified by the accountant and setting forth such
particulars, as may be prescribed.
(4) Where a person is required, by or under any other law, to get his accounts
audited, then it shall be sufficient compliance of this section, if such person––
47 Rule 46(6), Form No. 25, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
48 Rule 47, Form No. 26, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                            121
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                     [Sec 26-66]
(a) gets the accounts of such business or profession audited under such
law before the specified date; and
(b) furnishes by that specified date the report of such audit along with
the report of the accountant in the form as may be prescribed.
(5) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “specified date” in relation to the accounts of the assessee of the
tax year, means the date one month prior to the due date for furnishing the
return of income under section 263(1).
(b) the payment or receipt, as the case may be, by a cheque drawn on
a bank or by a bank draft, which is not account payee, shall be deemed to be
the payment or receipt, as the case may be, in cash.
Special provision for computing deductions in case of business
reorganisation of co-operative banks.
