166. (1) Where,—
(a) the assessee has entered into an international transaction or specified
domestic transaction in any tax year; and
(b) the Assessing Officer considers it necessary or expedient so to do,
he may refer the determination of the arm’s length price in relation to such
transaction to the Transfer Pricing Officer, with the previous approval of the
Principal Commissioner or Commissioner.
(2) No reference under sub-section (1) for computation of the arm’s length price
in relation to an international transaction or a specified domestic transaction shall be
made, if the Transfer Pricing Officer has declared that option exercised by the assessee
in sub-section (9) in relation to such transaction is valid for such tax year.
(3) If any reference for an international transaction or a specified domestic
transaction under sub-section (1), in respect of a tax year, for which the option is
declared valid under sub-section (9) is made before or after such declaration by the
Transfer Pricing Officer, the provisions of sub-section (1) shall have the effect as if
no reference is made for such transaction.
(4) Where a reference is made under sub-section (1), the Transfer Pricing Officer
shall serve a notice on the assessee requiring him to produce or cause to be produced on a
date specified therein, any evidence on which the assessee may rely in support of the
determination made by him of the arm’s length price in relation to such transaction.
(5) Where,—
(a) any international transaction or specified domestic transaction, other
than an international transaction or a specified domestic transaction referred
under sub-section (1); or
(b) any international transaction or a specified domestic transaction that
the assessee has not included in the report under section 172,
comes to the notice of the Transfer Pricing Officer during the course of the
proceedings before him, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply as if such
transaction is a transaction referred to him under sub-section (1).
(6) On the date specified in the notice under sub-section (4), or as soon
thereafter as may be,––
(a) after hearing such evidence as the assessee may produce, including
any information or documents referred to in section 171(2);
(b) after considering such evidence as the Transfer Pricing Officer may
require on any specified points; and
Direct Taxes Committee                                                                245
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                      [Sec 161-177]
(c) after taking into account all relevant materials which he has
gathered,
the Transfer Pricing Officer shall, by order in writing, determine the arm’s length
price in relation to the international transaction or specified domestic transaction
as per section 165(4) and send a copy of his order to the Assessing Officer and to
the assessee.
9[(7) Where a reference was made under sub-section (1), an order under sub-
section (6) may be made at any time before one month prior to the month in which
period of limitation referred to in section 286 or 296, for making the order of
assessment or reassessment or recomputation or fresh assessment, expires and
accordingly, where such period expires on—
(a) the 31st March of any year, the order under sub-section (6) shall be
made on or before the 31st January of that year;
(b) the 31st December of any year, the order under sub-section (6)
shall be made on or before the 31st October of that year.]
(8) If the period of limitation available to the Transfer Pricing Officer for
making an order under sub-section (6) is less than sixty days in the circumstances
referred to in section 286(3)(b) or (h),such remaining period shall be extended to
sixty days and the aforesaid period of limitation shall be deemed to have been
extended accordingly.
(9) The arm’s length price, being determined in relation to the international
transaction or the specified domestic transaction under sub-section (6) for any tax
year shall apply to similar international transaction or specified domestic transaction
for the two consecutive tax years immediately following such tax year, on fulfilment
of the following conditions namely:––
(a) the assessee exercises an option or options to the above effect for the
said two consecutive tax years;
(b) such option or options are exercised in such form, manner and within
such period as may be prescribed;10 and
(c) the Transfer Pricing Officer shall, within one month from the end of
the month in which such option or options are exercised, by an order in
writing, declare that such option or options are valid subject to the conditions,
as may be prescribed.
(10) The provisions of sub-section (9) shall not apply to any proceedings
under Chapter XVI-B.
(11) On receipt of the order under sub-section (6), the Assessing Officer shall
compute the total income of the assessee under section 165(6) in conformity with
the arm’s length price as so determined by the Transfer Pricing Officer.
(12) Irrespective of anything contained in sub-section (11), where the Transfer
Pricing Officer has declared an option exercised by the assessee as valid option
under sub-section (9), he shall examine and determine the arm’s length price in
relation to such similar transaction for two consecutive tax years immediately
9  Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
10 Rule 82, Form Nos. 46 and 47, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                               246
CH. X - SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO AVOIDANCE OF TAX                  [Sec 161-177]
following such tax year, in the order referred to in sub-section (6) and on receipt of
such order, the Assessing Officer shall proceed to recompute the total income
of the assessee for the said two consecutive tax years as per the provisions of
section 288(2).
(13) For rectifying any mistake apparent from the record, the Transfer Pricing
Officer,––
(a) may amend any order passed by him under sub-section (6), and the
provisions of section 287 shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly; and
(b) shall send a copy of such order to the Assessing Officer who shall
thereafter amend the order of assessment in conformity with such order of the
Transfer Pricing Officer.
(14) The Transfer Pricing Officer may exercise all or any of the powers
specified in section 246(1)(a) to (d) or 252(1)(a) or 253 for the purposes of
determining the arm’s length price under this section.
(15) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of
sub-sections (9) and (12), the Board may, with the prior approval of the Central
Government, issue guidelines for the purpose of removing such difficulty.
(16) Every guideline issued by the Board under sub-section (15) shall be laid
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both houses agree in making any modification in such
guideline or both Houses agree that the guideline, should not be issued, the guideline
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that guideline.
(17) For the purposes of this section, “Transfer Pricing Officer” means a Joint
Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner or Assistant Commissioner authorised by
the Board to perform all or any of the functions of an Assessing Officer specified in
sections 165 and 171 in respect of any person or class of persons.
Power of Board to make safe harbour rules.
