198. (1) Irrespective of anything contained in section 197, the tax payable by
an assessee on his total income shall be determined as per the provisions of
sub-section (2), if—
(a) the total income includes any income chargeable under the head
“Capital gains”;
(b) the capital gains arise from the transfer of a long-term capital asset
being an equity share in a company or a unit of an equity oriented fund or a
unit of a business trust;
Direct Taxes Committee                                                                280
CH. XIII - DETERMINATION OF TAX IN SPECIAL CASES                       [Sec 190-235]
(c) securities transaction tax under Chapter VII of the Finance (No. 2)
Act, 2004 has—
(i) in a case where the long-term capital asset is in the nature of an
equity share in a company, been paid on acquisition and transfer of such
capital asset; or
(ii) in a case where the long-term capital asset is in the nature of a
unit of an equity oriented fund or a unit of a business trust, been paid on
transfer of such capital asset.
(2) The tax payable by the assessee on the total income referred to in
sub-section (1) shall be the aggregate of—
(a) income-tax calculated on such long-term capital gains exceeding
₹ 125000 at the rate of 12.5%; and
(b) income-tax payable on the total income as reduced by long-term
capital gains referred to in sub-section (1) as if the total income so reduced
were the total income of the assessee.
(3) In the case of an individual or a Hindu undivided family, being a resident,
where the total income as reduced by long-term capital gains computed under
sub-section (1) is below the maximum amount which is not chargeable to
income-tax, then,—
(a) such long-term capital gains shall be reduced by the amount by which
the total income as so reduced falls short of the maximum amount which is
not chargeable to income-tax; and
(b) the tax on the balance of such long-term capital gains shall be
computed at the rate as referred to in sub-section (2).
(4) The condition specified in sub-section (1)(c) shall not apply to a
transfer undertaken on a recognised stock exchange located in any International
Financial Services Centre and where the consideration for such transfer is
received or receivable in foreign currency.
(5) The Central Government may, by notification, specify the nature of
acquisition in respect of which the provisions of sub-section (1)(c)(i) shall not apply.
(6) Where the gross total income of an assessee includes any long-term capital
gains referred to in sub-section (1), the deduction under Chapter VIII shall be
allowed from the gross total income as reduced by such capital gains.
(7) Where the total income of an assessee includes any long-term capital
gains referred to in sub-section (1), the rebate under section 156 shall be
allowed from the income-tax on the total income as reduced by tax payable on
such capital gains.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                              281
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                  [Sec 190-235]
(8) For the purposes of this section, the expression “equity oriented fund”
means a fund set up under a scheme of a mutual fund specified in Schedule VII
(Table: Sl. No. 20 or 21) or under a scheme of an insurance company comprising
unit linked insurance policies to which exemption in Schedule II (Table: Sl. No.
2) does not apply and—
(i) in a case where the fund invests in the units of another fund which is
traded on a recognised stock exchange,—
(A) a minimum of 90% of the total proceeds of such fund is
invested in the units of such other fund; and
(B) such other fund also invests a minimum of 90% of its total
proceeds in the equity shares of domestic companies listed on a
recognised stock exchange; and
(ii) in any other case, a minimum of 65% of the total proceeds of such
fund is invested in the equity shares of domestic companies listed on a
recognised stock exchange,
and, for the purposes of this clause,––
(I) the percentage of equity shareholding or unit held in respect of the
fund, shall be computed with reference to the annual average of the
monthly averages of the opening and closing figures;
(II) in case of a scheme of an insurance company comprising unit
linked insurance policies to which exemption in Schedule II
(Table: Sl. No. 2) does not apply, the minimum requirement of 90% or
65%, as the case may be, is required to be satisfied throughout the term of
such insurance policy.
