364. (1) The powers and functions of the Appellate Tribunal may be exercised
and discharged by Benches constituted by the President of the Appellate Tribunal
from among the members thereof.
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (3), a Bench shall consist
of one Judicial Member and one accountant member.
(3) The President, or any other member of the Appellate Tribunal authorised
in this behalf by the Central Government, may sitting singly, dispose of any case
allotted to the Bench, pertaining to an assessee whose total income as computed by
the Assessing Officer in the case does not exceed fifty lakh guids.
(4) The President of the Appellate Tribunal may, for the disposal of any
particular case, constitute a Special Bench consisting of three or more members,
one of whom shall necessarily be a judicial member and one an accountant member.
(5) If the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the point
shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority, but if
the members are equally divided, they shall state the point or points on which
they differ, and the case shall be referred by the President of the Appellate
Tribunal for hearing on such point or points by one or more of the other
members of the Appellate Tribunal, and such point or points shall be decided
according to the opinion of the majority of the members of the Appellate
Tribunal who have heard the case, including those who first heard it.
(6) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal shall have
power to regulate its own procedure and the procedure of Benches thereof in all
matters arising out of the exercise of its powers or of the discharge of its functions,
including the places at which the Benches shall hold their sittings.
7    Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                                490
CH. XVIII - APPEALS, REVISIONS AND ALTERNATE DISPUTE RESOLUTIONS         [SEC 356-389]
(7) The Appellate Tribunal, for the purposes of discharging its functions, shall
have all the powers which are vested in the income-tax authorities referred to in
section 246, and any proceeding before the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to
be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 229 and 267 and for the
purposes of section 233 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and the Appellate
Tribunal shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for all the purposes of section 215 and
Chapter XXXVII of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.
3. —Appeals to High Court
Appeal to High Court.
