267. (1) Where no return of income under section 263(1) or (4) has been
furnished by an assessee and, after taking into account the amounts referred to in
sub-section (2), tax is payable on the basis of return to be furnished by such
assessee under section 263(6), then—
(a) the assessee shall be liable to pay such tax together with interest
and fee payable under any of the provisions of this Act for any delay in
furnishing the return or any default or delay in payment of advance tax;
(b) such tax, interest and fee shall be payable along with the payment
of additional income-tax computed as per sub-section (5), before furnishing
the return; and
(c) the return shall be accompanied by proof of payment of such
tax, additional income-tax, interest and fee.
(2) The amounts referred to in sub-section (1) shall be,—
(a) the amount of tax, if any, already paid as advance tax;
(b) any tax deducted or collected at source;
(c) any relief of tax claimed under section 157;
28 Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                              377
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                    [Sec 262-267]
(d) any relief of tax or deduction of tax claimed under section 159(1)
or 160 on account of tax paid in a country outside India;
(e) any relief of tax claimed under section 159(2) on account of tax
paid in any specified territory outside India referred to in that section; and
29[(f) any tax credit claimed to be set off as per the provisions of
sections 206(2)(e) to (h) and 206(3) and (4).]
(3) Where, return of income under section 263(1) or (4) or (5) (referred to
as earlier return) has been furnished by an assessee and, after taking into account
the amounts referred to in sub-section (4) [as increased by the amount of refund,
if any, issued in respect of such earlier return], tax is payable on the basis of return
to be furnished by such assessee under section 263(6) then—
(a) the assessee shall be liable to pay such tax together with interest
payable under any provision of this Act for any default or delay in payment
of advance tax;
(b) such tax, interest and fee shall be payable along with the payment
of additional income-tax, as computed as per sub-section (5), as reduced by
the amount of interest paid under the provisions of this Act in the earlier
return, before furnishing the return; and
(c) the return shall be accompanied by proof of payment of such tax,
additional income-tax, interest and fee.
(4) The amounts referred to in sub-section (3) shall be the following,—
(a) the amount of relief or tax referred to in section 266(1), the credit
for which has been taken in the earlier return;
(b) tax deducted or collected at source, as per the provisions of
Chapter XIX-B, on any income which is subject to such deduction or
collection and which is taken into account in computing total income and
which has not been included in the earlier return;
(c) any relief of tax or deduction of tax claimed under section 159(1)
or 160 on account of tax paid in a country outside India on such income
which has not been included in the earlier return;
(d) any relief of tax claimed under section 159(2) on account of
tax paid in any specified territory outside India referred to in that section
on such income which has not been included in the earlier return; and
30[(e) any tax credit claimed, to be set off as per the provisions of
sections 206(2)(e) to (h) and 206(3) and (4) which has not been claimed in
the earlier return.]
[(5)(i) For the purposes of sub-sections (1) and (3), the additional
income-tax payable at the time of furnishing the return under section 263(6)
shall be equal to,—
29 Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
30 Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
31 Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                              378
CH. XV-RETURN OF INCOME                                                  [Sec 262-267]
(a) 25% of aggregate of tax and interest payable, as determined in
sub-section (1) or (3), as the case may be, if such return is furnished after
the expiry of the time available under section 263(4) or (5) and before
completion of twelve months from the end of the financial year succeeding
the relevant tax year; or
(b) 50% of aggregate of tax and interest payable, as determined in
sub-section (1) or (3), as the case may be, if such return is furnished after
the expiry of twelve months but before completion of twenty-four months
from the end of the financial year succeeding the relevant tax year; or
(c) 60% of aggregate of tax and interest payable, as determined in
sub-section (1) or (3), as the case may be, if such return is furnished after
the expiry of twenty-four months, but before the completion of thirty-six
months, from the end of the financial year succeeding the relevant tax
year; or
(d) 70% of aggregate of tax and interest payable, as determined in
sub-section (1) or (3), as the case may be, if such return is furnished after
the expiry of thirty-six months, but before the completion of forty-eight
months, from the end of the financial year succeeding the relevant tax year.
(ii) Where an updated return is filed in pursuance of a notice issued under
section 280 within the period specified in the said notice, the additional income-
tax payable under sub-section (5)(i) shall be increased by a further sum of 10 %
of the aggregate of tax and interest payable, as determined in sub-section (1) or
(3), as the case may be.]
(6) For the purposes of computation of “additional income-tax” under this
section, tax shall include surcharge and cess, by whatever name called, on such
tax.
(7) Irrespective of anything contained in section 424(2), for the purposes of
sub-section (3), interest payable under section 424 shall be computed on an
amount equal to the assessed tax where, “assessed tax” means the tax on the total
income as declared in the return to be furnished under section 263(6),—
(a) after taking into account,—
(i) the amount of relief or tax referred to in section 266(1), the credit
for which has been claimed in the earlier return, if any;
(ii) tax deducted or collected at source, as per the provisions of
Chapter XIX-B, on any income which is subject to such deduction or
collection and which is taken into account in computing such total income,
which has not been included in the earlier return;
(iii) any relief of tax or deduction of tax claimed under
section 159(1) or 160 on account of tax paid in a country outside India
on such income which has not been included in the earlier return;
(iv) any relief of tax claimed under section 159(2) on account of
tax paid in any specified territory outside India referred to in that section
on such income which has not been included in the earlier return;
Direct Taxes Committee                                                                379
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                     [Sec 262-267]
32 [(v) any tax credit claimed, to be set off as per sections
206(2)(e) to (h) and 206(3) and (4), which has not been claimed in the
earlier return; and]
(b) as increased by refund, if any, issued in respect of such earlier return.
(8) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this section,
the Board may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by
notification, issue guidelines for the purposes of removing the difficulty.
(9) Every guideline issued by the Board under sub-section (8) shall be laid
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both houses agree in making any
modification in such guideline or both Houses agree that the guideline, should not
be issued, the guideline shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that guideline.
(10) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) interest payable under section 423, for the purposes of sub-section
(1), shall be computed on the amount of tax on the total income as declared
in the return under section 263(6), as per section 266(4);
(b) interest payable under section 425, for the purposes of sub-section
(3), shall be computed after taking into account the total income furnished
in the return under section 263(6) as the returned income;
(c) interest payable, for the purposes of sub-section (5), shall be the
interest chargeable under any provision of this Act, on the income as per return
furnished under section 263(6), as reduced by interest paid, as per the earlier
return, if any.
(11) For the purposes of sub-section (10)(c), the interest paid in the earlier
return shall be nil in case of an updated return referred to in sub-section (1).
32 Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                               380
