196. (1) Where the total income of an assessee includes any income chargeable
under the head “Capital gains”, arising from the transfer of a short-term capital
asset––
(a) being an equity share in a company or a unit of an equity oriented
fund or a unit of a business trust; and
(b) the transaction of sale of such equity share or unit is chargeable
to securities transaction tax under Chapter VII of the Finance (No. 2)
Act, 2004, then,
the tax payable by the assessee on the total income, subject to the provisions of
sub-section (2), shall be the aggregate of—
(i) income-tax calculated on such short-term capital gains at the
rate of 20%;
3   Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                               278
CH. XIII - DETERMINATION OF TAX IN SPECIAL CASES                       [Sec 190-235]
(ii) income-tax payable on the balance amount of the total income as if
such balance amount were the total income of the assessee.
(2) In the case of an individual or a Hindu undivided family, being a resident,
where the total income, as reduced by short-term capital gains computed under
sub-section (1), is below the maximum amount which is not chargeable to
income-tax, then,—
(a) such short-term capital gains shall be reduced by the amount by
which the total income as so reduced falls short of the maximum amount
which is not chargeable to income-tax; and
(b) the tax on the balance of such short-term capital gains shall be
computed at the rate as applicable in sub-section (1)(i).
(3) The provisions of sub-section (1)(b) shall not apply to a transaction
undertaken on a recognised stock exchange located in any International Financial
Services Centre and where the consideration for such transaction is paid or payable
in foreign currency.
(4) Where the gross total income of an assessee includes any short-term capital
gains referred to in sub-section (1), the deduction under Chapter VIII shall be
allowed from the gross total income as reduced by such capital gains.
(5) For the purposes of this section, the expression “equity oriented fund” shall
have the meaning assigned to it in section 198.
Tax on long-term capital gains.
