509. (1) Any person, being a reporting entity, as may be prescribed, in respect
of a crypto-asset, shall furnish information in respect of a transaction of such
crypto-asset in a statement, for such period, within such time, in such form and
manner15 and to such income-tax authority16, as may be prescribed.
(2) Where the prescribed income-tax authority considers that the statement
furnished under sub-section (1) is defective, he may intimate the defect to the person
who has furnished such statement and give him an opportunity of rectifying the
defect within thirty days from the date of such intimation or such further period as
may be allowed, and if the defect is not rectified within such period, the provisions
of this Act shall apply as if such person had furnished inaccurate information in the
statement.
(3) Where a person who is required to furnish a statement under
sub-section (1) has not furnished the same within the specified time, the prescribed
income-tax authority may serve upon such person a notice requiring him to furnish
such statement within a period not exceeding thirty days from the date of service of
such notice and he shall furnish the statement within the time specified in the notice.
14 Rules 241, 242, 243 and 244, Form No. 167, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
15 Rule 243, Form No. 167, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
16 Rule 243(9), Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                               610
CH. XXIII – MISCELLANEOUS                                                [Sec 499-536]
(4) If any person, having furnished a statement under sub-section (1), or in
pursuance of a notice issued under sub-section (3), comes to know or discovers any
inaccuracy in the information provided in the statement, he shall within ten days
inform the prescribed income-tax authority, the inaccuracy in such statement and
furnish the correct information in such manner as may be prescribed.
(5) The Central Government may, by rules prescribe—
(a) the persons referred to in sub-section (1) to be registered with the
prescribed income-tax authority;
(b) the nature of information and the manner in which such information
shall be maintained by the persons referred to in clause (a); and
(c) the due diligence17 to be carried out by the persons referred to
in sub-section (1) for the purpose of identification of any crypto-asset user or
owner.
(6) For the purposes of this section, the expression “crypto-asset” shall have
the meaning assigned to it in section 2(111)(d).
Annual information statement.18
