500. (1) Where, during the pendency of any proceeding for—
(a) the assessment of any income or for the assessment or reassessment
of any income, which has escaped assessment; or
(b) imposition of penalty under section 444, where the amount or
aggregate of amounts of penalty likely to be imposed under the said section
exceeds two crore rupees,
the Assessing Officer is of the opinion that for protecting the interests of the revenue
it is necessary so to do, he may, with the previous approval of the Competent
Authority by order in writing, attach provisionally any property belonging to the
assessee in the manner prescribed in section 413.
(2) Every provisional attachment under sub-section (1) shall cease to have
effect after the expiry of six months from the date of the order made under the said
sub-section.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                              604
CH. XXIII – MISCELLANEOUS                                              [Sec 499-536]
(3) The Competent Authority may, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
extend the period referred to in sub-section (2) and the total period of such extension
shall not exceed two years or sixty days after the date of order of assessment or
reassessment, whichever is later.
(4) Where the assessee furnishes a guarantee from a scheduled bank for an
amount not less than the fair market value of the property provisionally attached
under sub-section (1), the Assessing Officer shall, by an order in writing, revoke
such attachment.
(5) For the purposes of sub-section (4), where the Assessing Officer is satisfied
that a guarantee from a scheduled bank for an amount lower than the fair market
value of the property is sufficient to protect the interests of the revenue, he may
accept such guarantee and revoke the attachment.
(6) The Assessing Officer may, for determining the value of the property
provisionally attached under sub-section (1), make a reference to the Valuation
Officer, who shall estimate the fair market value of the property in the manner
provided under section 269(3) to (7), and submit a report of such estimate to the
Assessing Officer within thirty days from the date of receipt of the reference.
(7) An order revoking the provisional attachment under sub-section (4) or (5)
shall be made—
(a) within forty-five days from the date of receipt of the guarantee, where
a reference to the Valuation Officer has been made under sub-section (6); or
(b) within fifteen days from the date of receipt of guarantee, in any
other case.
(8) Where a notice of demand specifying a sum payable is served upon the
assessee and the assessee fails to pay that sum within the time specified, the
Assessing Officer may invoke the guarantee furnished under sub-section (4) or (5),
wholly or in part, to recover the amount.
(9) The Assessing Officer shall, in the interests of revenue, invoke the bank
guarantee, if the assessee fails to renew the guarantee referred to in sub-section (4)
or (5), or fails to furnish a new guarantee from a scheduled bank for an equal
amount, before fifteen days of its expiry.
(10) The amount realised by invoking the guarantee referred to in
sub-section (4) or (5) shall be adjusted against the existing demand which is
payable by the assessee; and the balance amount, if any, shall be deposited in the
Personal Deposit Account of the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner in the
branch of, —
(a) the Reserve Bank of India or the State Bank of India; or
(b) any bank as may be appointed by the Reserve Bank of India as its
agent under section 45(1) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 at the place
where the office of the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner is situated.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                             605
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                   [Sec 499-536]
(11) Where the Assessing Officer is satisfied that the guarantee referred to in
sub-section (4) or (5) is not required any more to protect the interests of the
revenue, he shall release that guarantee forthwith.
(12) For the purposes of this section, “Competent Authority” means the
Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner, Principal Commissioner or
Commissioner, Principal Director General or Director General or Principal
Director or Director.
Service of notice, generally.1
