21. (1) For the purposes of section 20, the annual value of any property shall
be deemed to be the higher of the following:—
(a) the sum for which it might reasonably be expected to let from year
to year; or
(b) the actual rent received or receivable by the owner, if the property
or any part of it is let.
(2) If the property or any part of it is let and was vacant for the whole or any
part of the tax year and owing to such vacancy the actual rent received or receivable
by the owner in respect thereof is less than the sum referred to in sub-section
(1)(a), the annual value of such property shall be deemed to be the amount so
received or receivable.
(3) The annual value of the property shall be reduced by the taxes (including
service taxes) levied by a local authority in respect of such property, actually paid
during the tax year by the owner, irrespective of when such taxes became payable.
(4) The rent which cannot be realised by the owner shall not be included in
computing the actual rent received or receivable, subject to the rules13 as may be
made in this behalf.
(5) Where a property is held as stock-in-trade and is not let wholly or partly
at any time during the tax year, the annual value of such property or part thereof
shall be 14[nil up to] two years from the end of the financial year in which the
certificate for completion of construction is obtained from the competent authority.
(6) The annual value of the property consisting of a house or any part thereof
shall be taken as nil, if the owner occupies it for his own residence or cannot
actually occupy it due to any reason.
(7) The provisions of sub-section (6)––
(a) shall apply only in respect of two of such houses as specified by the
assessee in this behalf;
(b) shall not apply, if the house or any part thereof is actually let during
any time of the tax year, or if the owner derives any other benefit from it.
13 Rule 21, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
14 Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                                57
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                          [Sec 20-25]
Deductions from income from house property.
