270. (1) Where a return has been made under section 263, or in response to a
notice under section 268(1) such return shall be processed in the following manner:—
(a) the total income or loss shall be computed after making the
adjustments towards the following:—
(i) any arithmetical error in the return; or
(ii) an incorrect claim, if such incorrect claim is apparent from any
information in the return; or
(iii) any such inconsistency in the return, with respect to the information
in the return of any preceding tax year, as may be prescribed; or
(iv) disallowance of loss claimed, if return of the tax year for which
set off of loss is claimed was furnished beyond the due date specified
under section 263(1); or
(v) disallowance of expenditure or increase in income indicated in
the audit report but not taken into account in computing the total income
in the return; or
(vi) disallowance of deduction claimed 9[* * *] under any of the
provisions of Chapter VIII-C, if the return is furnished beyond the due
date specified under section 263(1);
(b) the tax, interest and fee, if any, shall be computed on the basis of the
total income computed under clause (a);
(c) the sum payable by, or the amount of refund due to, the assessee shall
be determined after adjustment of the tax, interest and fee, if any, computed
under clause (b) by—
(i) any tax deducted at source;
(ii) any tax collected at source;
(iii) any advance tax paid;
(iv) any rebate or relief allowable under Chapter IX;
(v) any tax paid on self-assessment; and
(vi) any amount paid otherwise by way of tax, interest or fee;
9   Omitted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                                   385
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                  [Sec 268-301]
(d) an intimation shall be sent to the assessee specifying the sum
determined to be payable by, or refund due to, the assessee under clause (c); and
(e) the amount of refund due to the assessee in pursuance of the
determination under clause (c) shall be granted to the assessee.
(2) Before making any adjustment under sub-section (1)(a),—
(a) a communication is to be given to the assessee of such adjustments
either in writing or in electronic mode;
(b) the response received from the assessee in this regard, if any, shall
be considered; and in a case where no response is received within thirty days
of the issue of such communication, such adjustments shall be made and
thereafter the intimation under sub-section (1)(d) shall be sent.
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), an intimation shall also be sent to the
assessee in a case where the loss declared in the return by the assessee is adjusted
but no tax, interest or fee is payable by, or no refund is due to, him.
(4) No intimation under sub-section (1) shall be sent after the expiry of nine
months from the end of the financial year in which the return is made.
(5) For the purposes of sub-sections (1) to (4),—
(a) “an incorrect claim apparent from any information in the return” shall
mean a claim, on the basis of an entry, in the return,—
(i) of an item, which is inconsistent with another entry of the same
or some other item in such return; or
(ii) in respect of which the information required to be furnished under
this Act to substantiate such entry has not been so furnished; or
(iii) in respect of a deduction, where such deduction exceeds
specified statutory limit which may have been expressed as monetary
amount or percentage or ratio or fraction;
(b) “the acknowledgement of the return” shall be deemed to be the
intimation in a case where no sum is payable by, or refundable to, the
assessee under sub-section (1)(c), and where no adjustment has been made
under sub-section (1)(a).
(6) For the purposes of processing of returns under sub-section (1), the Board
may make a scheme for centralised processing of returns with a view to
expeditiously determining the tax payable by, or the refund due to, the assessee as
required under the said sub-section.
(7) The scheme made under sub-section (6) shall, as soon as may be laid before
each House of Parliament.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                             386
CH. XVI - PROCEDURE FOR ASSESSMENT                                          [Sec 268-301]
(8) Where a return has been furnished under section 263 or in response to a
notice under section 268(1), the Assessing Officer or the prescribed income-tax
authority, if, considers it necessary or expedient to ensure that the assessee—
(a) has not understated the income;
(b) has not computed excessive loss;
(c) has not under-paid the tax in any manner,
shall serve on the assessee a notice requiring him, on a date to be specified therein,—
(i) either to attend the office of the Assessing Officer; or
(ii) to produce, or cause to be produced before the Assessing Officer any
evidence on which the assessee may rely in support of the return.
(9) No notice under sub-section (8) shall be served on the assessee after the expiry
of three months from the end of the financial year in which the return is furnished.
(10) On the day specified in the notice issued under sub-section (8), or as soon
afterwards as may be, after hearing such evidence as the assessee may produce and
such other evidence as the Assessing Officer may require on specified points, and
after taking into account all relevant material which he has gathered, the Assessing
Officer, subject to the provisions of sub-sections (11) and (13), shall—
(a) by an order in writing, make an assessment of the total income or
loss of the assessee; and
(b) determine the sum payable by him or refund of any amount due to
him on the basis of such assessment.
(11) In the case of entities referred to in sub-section (12), which are required
to furnish the return of income under section 263(1)(a)(iv), no order under
sub-section (10) making an assessment of the total income or loss of any such entity
shall be made by the Assessing Officer, without giving effect to the provisions of
section 11, unless—
(i) the Assessing Officer has intimated the Central Government or the
prescribed authority the contravention of the provisions mentioned in Schedule III
(Table: Sl. No. 23, 24 or 25), by such entity, where in his view such contravention
has taken place; and
(ii) the approval granted to such entity has been withdrawn or
notification issued in respect of such entity has been rescinded.
(12) For the purposes of sub-section (11), the entities shall be—
(a) a research association referred to in Schedule III (Table: Sl. No. 23);
(b) an association or institution referred to in Schedule III (Table: Sl. No. 24);
(c) an institution referred to in Schedule III (Table: Sl. No. 25).
10 Rule 175, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                                    387
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                 [Sec 268-301]
(13) In the case of a registered non-profit organisation, where the Assessing
Officer is satisfied that any such entity has committed any specified violation as
mentioned in section 351(1), he shall—
(a) send a reference to the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner to
withdraw the approval or registration; and
(b) no order under sub-section (10) making an assessment of the total
income or loss of such registered non-profit organisation shall be made by him
without giving effect to the order passed by the Principal Commissioner or
Commissioner under section 351(2)(ii)(A) or (B).
(14) While making an assessment under sub-section (10), where the Assessing
Officer is satisfied that the activities of the university, college or other institution
referred to in section 45(3)(a) (herein referred to as entity) are not being carried out
in accordance with all or any of the conditions subject to which such entity was
approved, then––
(a) he may, after giving a reasonable opportunity of showing cause
against the proposed withdrawal to the concerned entity, recommend to the
Central Government to withdraw the approval; and
(b) the Central Government may by order, withdraw the approval and
forward a copy of the order to the concerned entity and the Assessing Officer.
(15) Where a regular assessment under sub-section (10) or section 271 is
made,—
(a) any tax or interest paid by the assessee under sub-section (1) shall be
deemed to have been paid towards such regular assessment;
(b) if no refund is due on regular assessment or the amount refunded
under sub-section (1) exceeds the amount refundable on regular
assessment, the whole or the excess amount so refunded shall be
deemed to be tax payable by the assessee and the provisions of this Act
shall apply accordingly.
Best judgment assessment.
