211. (1) Where the total income of an assessee,––
(a) being a sportsman (including an athlete), who is not a citizen of
India and is a non-resident, includes any income received or receivable by
way of––
(i) participation in India in any game [other than a game the
winnings from which are taxable as specified in section 194(1) (Table:
Sl. No. 1)] or sport; or
(ii) advertisement; or
(iii) contribution of articles relating to any game or sport in India
in newspapers, magazines or journals; or
(b) being a non-resident sports association or institution, includes
any amount guaranteed to be paid or payable to such association or
institution in relation to any game, other than a game the winnings from
which are taxable as specified in section 194(1) (Table: Sl. No. 1) or sport
played in India; or
Direct Taxes Committee                                                                312
CH. XIII - DETERMINATION OF TAX IN SPECIAL CASES                       [Sec 190-235]
(c) being an entertainer, who is not a citizen of India and is a
non-resident, includes any income received or receivable from his
performance in India,
then, the aggregate of income-tax payable by the assessee shall be computed at the
rate specified in the column C applied on the corresponding income specified in
column B:—
Table
Sl. No.                         Income                       Rate of Income-tax
payable
A                                B                                  C
1.          Income referred to in clause (a) or (b)               20%
or (c).
2.          Total income as reduced by income             Rates in force.
referred to in clause (a) or (b) or (c).
(2) No deduction in respect of any expenditure or allowance shall be allowed
under any provision of this Act in computing the income referred to in
sub-section (1).
(3) It shall not be necessary for the assessee to furnish a return of his income
under section 263(1), if—
(a) his total income during the tax year consisted only of income
referred to in sub-section (1); and
(b) the tax deductible at source under the provisions of Chapter XIX-B
has been deducted from such income.
Interpretation.
