209. (1) The income-tax payable, on the total income of an assessee, being a
non-resident, which includes income specified in column B of the Table below,
shall be the aggregate of income-tax computed at the rate specified in the
column C applied on the corresponding income specified in column B.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                             308
CH. XIII - DETERMINATION OF TAX IN SPECIAL CASES                         [Sec 190-235]
Table
Sl.                                Income                                  Rate of
No.                                                                      income-tax
payable
A                                    B                                       C
1.       From interest on––                                                 10%
(a) bonds of an Indian company issued as per
such scheme as may be notified by the Central
Government; or
(b) bonds of a public sector company sold by the
Government,
and purchased in foreign currency.
2.          From dividends on Global Depository Receipts—                   10%
(a) issued as per such scheme as may be notified by
the Central Government against the initial issue of
shares of an Indian company and purchased in foreign
currency through an approved intermediary; or
(b) issued against the shares of a public sector
company sold by the Government and purchased by
him in foreign currency through an approved
intermediary; or
(c) issued or re-issued as per a scheme as may be
notified by the Central Government, against the
existing shares of an Indian company purchased in
foreign currency through an approved intermediary.
3.       Long-term capital gains arising from the transfer of              12.5%
bonds referred to against serial number 1 or Global
Depository Receipts referred to against serial number 2.
4.        Total income as reduced by income referred to against           Rates in
serial numbers 1 to 3.                                             force.
(2) Where the gross total income of the non-resident—
(a) consists only of income by way of interest or dividends in respect
of––
(i) bonds referred to in sub-section (1) (Table: Sl. No. 1); or
(ii) Global Depository Receipts referred to in sub-section (1)
(Table: Sl. No. 2),
Direct Taxes Committee                                                                309
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                  [Sec 190-235]
no deduction shall be allowed under sections 28 to 58, 60 and 61 or section 93(1)(a)
or (e) or under Chapter VIII;
(b) includes any income referred to in sub-section (1) (Table: Sl. No. 1)
to (Table: Sl. No. 3),––
(i) the gross total income shall be reduced by the such
income; and
(ii) the deduction under Chapter VIII shall be allowed as if
the gross total income so reduced, were the gross total income
of the assessee.
(3) The provisions of section 72(6) shall not apply for computation of
long-term capital gains arising out of the transfer of long-term capital asset being
bonds or Global Depository Receipts referred to in sub-section (1) (Table: Sl. No. 3).
(4) It shall not be necessary for a non-resident to furnish a return of his
income under section 263(1), if—
(a) his total income during the tax year consisted only of income
referred to in sub-sections (1) (Table: Sl. No. 1) and (Table: Sl. No. 2); and
(b) the tax deductible at source under the provisions of Chapter XIX-B
has been deducted from such income.
(5) Where the assessee acquired Global Depository Receipts or bonds in an
amalgamated or resulting company by virtue of his holding Global Depository
Receipts or bonds in the amalgamating or demerged company, as the case may be,
as per the provisions of sub-section (1), the provisions of that sub-section shall
apply to such Global Depository Receipts or bonds.
(6) For the purposes of this section,––
(a) “approved intermediary” means an intermediary which is approved
as per a scheme as may be notified by the Central Government; and
(b) “Global Depository Receipts” shall have the meaning assigned to it
in section 193(4)(a).
Tax on income of Foreign Institutional Investors from securities or capital
gains arising from their transfer26.
