31. (1) The amount mentioned in column C of the Table below, in respect
of any provision for bad and doubtful debts made by the assessee specified in
column B thereof, shall be allowed as a deduction in computation of income
chargeable under section 26.
17 Substituted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026, i.e. from the date of original
enactment.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                            63
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                [Sec 26-66]
Table
Sl.                 Specified assessee                Amount of deduction
No.
A                            B                                C
1.        (a) A scheduled bank, other than a bank    (a) not more than
incorporated by or under the laws of a     8.5% of the total income
country outside India; or                  of the tax year computed
(b) a non-scheduled bank; or            before making any
deduction under this
(c) a co-operative bank, other than—
clause and Chapter VIII,
(i) a primary agricultural credit    and an additional amount
society; or                             up to 10% of the
(ii) a      primary       co-operative
aggregate          average
agricultural and rural development bank.advances made by rural
branches computed in
the manner as may be
prescribed18;
(b) for an assessee
mentioned in clauses (a)
and (b) of column B, at its
option, an additional
amount in excess of
clause (a) of this column
but not more than the
income from redemption
of securities as per a
scheme framed by the
Central Government,
when such income has
been disclosed in the
return of income under
the head “Profits and
gains of business or
profession”.
2.        (a) A bank incorporated by or under the    Not more than 5% of
laws of a country outside India; or        the total income of a tax
(b) a public financial institution or a year computed before
State Financial Corporation or a State making any deduction
Industrial Investment Corporation; or      under this clause and
Chapter VIII.
(c) a non-banking financial company.
18 Rule 22, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                       64
CH. IV D.- PROFITS AND GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION                   [Sec 26-66]
(2) Any amount of bad debt, or part of it, in the tax year in which such
amount is written off as irrecoverable in the accounts of the assessee, shall be
allowed as deduction in computation of income chargeable under section 26,
subject to the following conditions:––
(a) it has been taken into account in computing the income of the
assessee of the tax year in which it is written off, or any earlier tax year, or
represents the money lent in the ordinary course of the business of banking or
money lending which is carried on by the assessee;
(b) if the amount ultimately recovered on any such debt or part of debt
is less than the difference between the debt or part and the amount so
deducted, the deficiency shall be deductible in the tax year in which the
ultimate recovery is made; and
(c) where it relates to an assessee to which sub-section (1) applies,––
(i) only that amount which exceeds the credit balance in the
provision for bad and doubtful debts account made under that sub-
section shall be allowed as deduction;
(ii) such amount shall be allowed only when the assessee has
debited any amount of bad debt or part thereof in that tax year to the
provision for bad and doubtful debts account made under that sub-
section; and
(iii) the aforesaid account shall be only one such account under
sub-section (1) and such account shall be related to all types of
advances, including advances made by rural branches.
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (2),––
(a) any bad debt or part of it written off as irrecoverable shall not
include any provision for bad and doubtful debt;
(b) any amount of bad debt or part of it, which has been taken into account
in computing the income of the assessee of the tax year in which the amount of
bad debt or part of it becomes irrecoverable or of an earlier tax year as per
income computation and disclosure standards notified under section 276(2)
without recording it in the accounts, shall be allowed as a deduction in
computing the income of the assessee of the tax year in which it becomes
irrecoverable and such bad debt or part of it shall be deemed to be written off as
irrecoverable in the accounts for the purposes of sub-section (2).
Other deductions.
