268. (1) For the purpose of making an assessment under this Act, the Assessing
Officer may serve on any person who has made a return under section 263 or in whose
case the time allowed under section 263(1) for furnishing the return has expired, a
notice requiring him, on a date to be specified therein,—
(a) where such person has not made a return within the time allowed under
section 263(1) or before the end of the financial year succeeding the relevant tax
year, to furnish a return of his income or the income of any other person in
respect of which he is assessable under this Act, in such form and verified in
such manner and setting forth such other particulars as may be prescribed;
(b) to produce, or cause to be produced, such accounts or documents as
the Assessing Officer may require;
(c) to furnish in writing and verified in the manner as may be prescribed
information in such form and on such points or matters (including a statement
of all assets and liabilities of the assessee, whether included in the accounts or
not) as the Assessing Officer may require.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1),––
(a) the previous approval of the Joint Commissioner shall be obtained
by the Assessing Officer before requiring the assessee to furnish a statement
of all assets and liabilities not included in the accounts;
(b) the Assessing Officer shall not require the production of any accounts
relating to a period more than three years prior to the relevant tax year.
(3) A notice under sub-section (1)(a) may also be served by the prescribed
income-tax authority.
(4) For the purposes of obtaining full information in respect of the income or loss
of any person, the Assessing Officer may make such inquiry as he considers necessary.
(5) If, at any stage of the proceedings before him, the Assessing Officer,
having regard to––
(a) the nature and complexity of the accounts; or
(b) volume of the accounts; or
(c) doubts about the correctness of the accounts; or
(d) multiplicity of transactions in the accounts; or
(e) specialised nature of business activity of the assessee,
1    Rule 164, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
2    Rule 169, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
3    Rule 170, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
4    Rule 172, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                              381
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                   [Sec 268-301]
and interests of the revenue, is of the opinion that it is necessary so to do, he may,
after giving the assessee a reasonable opportunity of being heard, and with the
previous approval of the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or
Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, direct the assessee to get either or both
of the following:—
(i) to get the accounts audited by an accountant, and to furnish a report
of such audit in the prescribed form duly signed and verified by such
accountant and setting forth such particulars, as may be prescribed, and such
other particulars as the Assessing Officer may require;
(ii) to get the inventory valued by a cost accountant, and to furnish a
report of such inventory valuation in the prescribed form as duly signed and
verified by such cost accountant and setting forth such particulars, as may be
prescribed, and such other particulars as the Assessing Officer may require.
(6) The accountant or the cost accountant as referred to in sub-section (5) shall
be nominated by the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or
Principal Commissioner or Commissioner for the purposes of the said sub-section.
(7) The provisions of sub-section (5) shall have effect irrespective of whether or
not accounts of the assessee have been audited under any other law for the time being in
force or otherwise.
(8) Every report under sub-section (5) shall be furnished by the assessee to the
Assessing Officer within such period as specified by the Assessing Officer.
(9) The Assessing Officer may, on his own motion, or on an application made
in this behalf by the assessee and for any good and sufficient reason, subject to the
provisions of sub-section (10), extend the period referred to in sub-section (8) by
such further period or periods as he thinks fit.
(10) The aggregate of the period originally fixed under sub-section (8) and the
period or periods so extended, as referred to in sub-section (9), shall not, in any case,
exceed six months from the end of the month in which the direction under
sub-section (5) is received by the assessee.
(11) The expenses of any audit or inventory valuation under sub-section (5)
(including incidental expenses and remuneration of the accountant or the cost
accountant) shall be—
(a) determined by the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief
Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner as per such
guidelines issued in this behalf; and
(b) paid by the Central Government.
5    Rule 171(1), Form No. 100, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
6    Rule 171(2), Form No. 101, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                              382
CH. XVI - PROCEDURE FOR ASSESSMENT                                   [Sec 268-301]
(12) The assessee shall, except where the assessment is made under section 271,
be given an opportunity of being heard in respect of any material gathered on the basis
of any inquiry under sub-section (4), or any audit or inventory valuation under
sub-section (5) and proposed to be utilised for the purposes of the assessment.
(13) For the purposes of this section, “cost accountant” means a cost accountant
as defined in section 2(1)(b) of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 and who
holds a valid certificate of practice under section 6(1) of the said Act.
Estimation of value of assets by Valuation Officer.
