46. (1) An assessee, at his option, shall be allowed a deduction of the whole of
the capital expenditure incurred, wholly and exclusively, for the purposes of any
specified business carried on by him during the tax year in which such expenditure
is incurred.
(2) Where the expenditure referred to in sub-section (1) is incurred prior to
the commencement of its operations and such expenditure is capitalised in the
Direct Taxes Committee                                                              95
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                            [Sec 26-66]
books of account as on the date of commencement of its operations, it shall be allowed
during the tax year in which such business is commenced.
(3) This section shall apply to the specified business fulfilling all of the
following conditions:—
(a) it is not set up by splitting up, or the reconstruction, of an already
existing business;
(b) it is not set up by the transfer of machinery or plant previously used
for any purpose to the specified business;
(c) if the business is of the nature referred to in sub-section (11)(d)(iii)
and such business—
(i) is owned by a company formed and registered in India
under the Companies Act, 2013 or by a consortium of such
companies or by an authority or a board or a corporation
established or constituted under any Central Act or State Act;
(ii) has been approved by the Petroleum and Natural Gas
Regulatory Board established under section 3(1) of the Petroleum
and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006 and notified by the
Central Government in this behalf;
(iii) has made not less than such proportion of its total
pipeline capacity as specified by regulations made by the
Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board established under
section 3(1) of the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board
Act, 2006 available for use on common carrier basis by any person
other than the assessee or an associated person; and
(iv) fulfils any other condition as may be prescribed34;
(d) if the business is of the nature referred to in sub-section
(11)(d)(xiv), such business,—
(i) is owned by a company registered in India or by a
consortium of such companies or by an authority or a board or
corporation or any other body established or constituted under any
Central Act or State Act;
(ii) entity referred to in sub-clause (i) has entered into an
agreement with the Central Government or a State Government or
a local authority or any other statutory body for developing or
operating and maintaining or developing, operating and
maintaining a new infrastructure facility.
34 Rule 66 and Audit Report in Form No. 32, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                                      96
CH. IV D.- PROFITS AND GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION                   [Sec 26-66]
(4) No deduction shall be allowed under the provisions of Chapter VIII-C in
relation to such specified business for the same or any other tax year, if a deduction
under sub-section (1) is claimed and allowed.
(5) No deduction in respect of the expenditure referred to in sub-section (1)
shall be allowed to the assessee under any other section in any tax year or under
this section in any other tax year, if the deduction has been claimed and allowed to
him under this section.
(6) The provisions of this section shall apply to the specified business referred
to in column B of the Table below if it commences its operations as specified in
column C thereof.
Table
Sl.               Nature of specified business                       Date of
No.                                                             commencement
of operations
being on or after
A                             B                                        C
1.        Laying and operating a cross-country natural           1st April, 2007.
gas pipeline network for distribution, including
storage facilities being an integral part of such
network.
2.        Building and operating a new hotel of two star         1st April, 2010.
or above category as classified by the Central
Government.
3.        Building and operating a new hospital with at          1st April, 2010.
least 100 beds for patients.
4.        Developing and building a housing project              1st April, 2010.
under a scheme for slum redevelopment or
rehabilitation framed by the Central Government or
a State Government, and which is notified by the
Board in this behalf in accordance with the
guidelines as may be prescribed.
5.        Developing and building a housing project             1st April, 2011.
under a scheme for affordable housing framed by the
Central Government or a State Government, and
which is notified by the Board in this behalf in
accordance with the guidelines as may be prescribed.
6.        A new plant or a newly installed capacity in an       1st April, 2011.
existing plant for production of fertilizer.
7.        Setting up and operating an inland container          1st April, 2012.
depot or a container freight station notified or
approved under the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962).
Direct Taxes Committee                                                            97
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                     [Sec 26-66]
8.          Bee-keeping and production of honey and                 1st April, 2012.
beeswax.
9.          Setting up and operating a warehousing                  1st April, 2012.
facility for storage of sugar.
10.         Laying and operating a slurry pipeline for the          1st April, 2014.
transportation of iron ore.
11.         Setting up and operating a semi- conductor              1st April, 2014.
wafer fabrication manufacturing unit, and which is
notified by the Board in this behalf in accordance
with the guidelines as may be prescribed.
12.         Developing, or operating and maintaining, or            1st April, 2017.
developing, operating and maintaining, any
infrastructure facility.
13.         In all other cases.                                     1st April, 2009.
(7) Where the assessee builds a hotel of two star or above category as
classified by the Central Government and subsequently, transfers the hotel
operation thereof to another person while retaining its ownership, the assessee
shall be deemed to be carrying on the specified business referred to in sub-section
(11)(d)(iv).
(8) The provisions contained in sections 122(6) and 140(8) and (13) shall, so
far as may be, apply to this section in respect of goods or services or assets held
for the purposes of the specified business.
(9) Any asset for which a deduction is claimed and allowed under this section–
(a) shall be used only for the specified business for a period of eight
years beginning with the tax year in which such asset is acquired or
constructed;
(b) is used for the purpose other than specified business during the
period referred to in clause (a), and is not chargeable to tax under section
26(2)(k), then the total amount of deduction so claimed and allowed in one or
more tax years, as reduced by the amount of depreciation allowable under
section 33, as if no deduction under this section was allowed, shall be deemed
to be the income chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or
profession” of the tax year in which the asset is so used.
(10) The provisions of sub-section (9)(b) shall not apply to a company which
has become a sick industrial company under section 17(1) of the Sick Industrial
Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985, as it stood before its repeal by the Sick
Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Repeal Act, 2003 during the period
specified in sub-section (9)(a).
(11) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “associated person”, in relation to the assessee, means a person,—
(i) who participates, directly or indirectly, or through one or more
intermediaries in the management or control or capital of the assessee;
Direct Taxes Committee                                                            98
CH. IV D.- PROFITS AND GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION                  [Sec 26-66]
(ii) who holds, directly or indirectly, shares carrying at least 26%
of the voting power in the capital of the assessee;
(iii) who appoints more than half of the board of directors or
members of the governing board, or one or more executive directors or
executive members of the governing board of the assessee; or
(iv) who guarantees at least 10% of the total borrowings of the
assessee;
(b) “cold chain facility” means a chain of facilities for storage or
transportation of agricultural and forest produce, meat and meat products,
poultry, marine and dairy products, products of horticulture, floriculture and
apiculture and processed food items under scientifically controlled conditions
including refrigeration and other facilities necessary for the preservation of
such produce;
(c) “infrastructure facility” means—
(i) a road including toll road, a bridge or a rail system;
(ii) a highway project including housing or other activities being
an integral part of the highway project;
(iii) a water supply project, water treatment system, irrigation
project, sanitation and sewerage system or solid waste management
system;
(iv) a port, airport, inland waterway, inland port or navigational
channel in the sea;
(d) “specified business” means any one or more of the following
businesses:—
(i) setting up and operating a cold chain facility;
(ii) setting up and operating a warehousing facility for storage of
agricultural produce;
(iii) laying and operating a cross-country natural gas or crude or
petroleum oil pipeline network for distribution, including storage
facilities being an integral part of such network;
(iv) building and operating, anywhere in India, a hotel of two star
or above category as classified by the Central Government;
(v) building and operating, anywhere in India, a hospital with at
least 100 beds for patients;
(vi) developing and building a housing project under a scheme for
slum redevelopment or rehabilitation framed by the Central
Government or a State Government and which is notified by the Board
in this behalf in accordance with the guidelines as may be prescribed;
(vii) developing and building a housing project under a scheme
for affordable housing framed by the Central Government or a State
Government and which is notified by the Board in this behalf in
accordance with the guidelines may be prescribed35;
35 Rule 36, Form No. 18, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                          99
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                            [Sec 26-66]
(viii) production of fertilizer in India;
(ix) setting up and operating an inland container depot or a
container freight station notified or approved under the Customs Act,
1962;
(x) bee-keeping and production of honey and beeswax;
(xi) setting up and operating a warehousing facility for storage of sugar;
(xii) laying and operating a slurry pipeline for the transportation of iron
ore;
(xiii) setting up and operating a semiconductor wafer fabrication
manufacturing unit which is notified by the Board in this behalf in
accordance with the guidelines as may be prescribed36;
(xiv) developing, or maintaining and operating, or developing,
maintaining and operating, a new infrastructure facility;
(e) any machinery or plant which was used outside India by any person
other than the assessee shall not be regarded as machinery or plant previously
used for any purpose, if—
(i) such machinery or plant was not, at any time before the date of
the installation by the assessee, used in India;
(ii) such machinery or plant is imported into India; and
(iii) no deduction of depreciation for such machinery or plant has
been allowed or is allowable under the provisions of this Act in
computing the total income of any person for any period before the date
of installation of the machinery or plant by the assessee;
(f) if any machinery or plant or its part previously used for any purpose
is transferred to the specified business and its total value does not exceed 20%
of the total value of the machinery or plant used in such business, then the
conditions specified in sub-section (3)(b) shall be deemed to be complied with;
(g) any expenditure of capital nature shall not include any expenditure–
(i) for which the payment or aggregate of payments made to a
person in a day, is not through specified banking or online mode,
exceeds ₹ 10000 rupees; or
(ii) incurred on the acquisition of any land or goodwill or
financial instrument.
Expenditure on agricultural extension project and skill development project.
