378. (1) The Competent Authority may, for any order, other than an order to
which section 377 applies, passed by an authority subordinate to him, either of his
own motion or on an application by the assessee for revision,––
(a) call for the record of any proceeding under this Act in which any
such order has been passed;
(b) make such inquiry or cause such inquiry to be made; and
(c) subject to the provisions of this Act, pass such order thereon, not
being an order prejudicial to the assessee, as he thinks fit.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                           499
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                [Sec 356-389]
(2) The Competent Authority shall not of his own motion revise any order
under this section if the order has been made more than one year previously.
(3) An application for revision under this section shall be made by the
assessee, within one year from the date on which the order in question was
communicated to him or the date on which he otherwise came to know of it,
whichever is earlier.
(4) The Competent Authority may, if he is satisfied that the assessee was
prevented by sufficient cause from making the application within the period as
provided in sub-section (3), admit an application made after the expiry of the period
specified in that sub-section.
(5) The Competent Authority shall not revise any order under this section in
the following cases:—
(a) where an appeal against the order lies to the Joint Commissioner
(Appeals) or the Commissioner (Appeals) or to the Appellate Tribunal, but
has not been made and the time within which such appeal may be made has
not expired;
(b) where the appeal lies to the Joint Commissioner (Appeals) or the
Commissioner (Appeals) or to the Appellate Tribunal, the assessee has not
waived his right of appeal; or
(c) where the order has been made the subject of an appeal to the Joint
Commissioner (Appeals) or the Commissioner (Appeals) or to the Appellate
Tribunal.
(6) Every application by an assessee for revision under this section shall be
accompanied by a fee of ₹ 500.
(7) On every application by an assessee for revision under this section, an
order shall be passed within one year from the end of the financial year in which
such application is made.
(8) In computing the period of limitation under sub-section (7), the following
period shall be excluded:—
(a) the time taken in giving an opportunity to the assessee to be reheard
under section 244(2); and
(b) the period commencing on the date on which stay on any proceeding
under this section has been granted by an order or injunction of any court and
ending on the date on which certified copy of the order or injunction vacating
the stay is received by the jurisdictional Principal Commissioner or
Commissioner.
(9) If after the exclusion of the period provided in sub-section (8), the time
limit for completion as provided in sub-section (7) is less than sixty days, such
Direct Taxes Committee                                                          500
CH. XVIII - APPEALS, REVISIONS AND ALTERNATE DISPUTE RESOLUTIONS           [SEC 356-389]
remaining period shall be extended to sixty days and such period of limitation shall
be deemed to have been extended accordingly.
(10) Irrespective of anything contained in sub-section (7), an order in revision
under that sub-section may be passed at any time in consequence of or to give effect
to any finding or direction contained in an order of the Appellate Tribunal, the High
Court or the Supreme Court.
(11) For the purposes of this section,––
(a) “Competent Authority” means the Principal Chief Commissioner or
Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner;
(b) an order by the Competent Authority declining to interfere shall, not
be deemed to be an order prejudicial to the assessee.
