19. (1) The income chargeable under the head “Salaries” shall be computed
after making the deductions in respect of sums of the nature mentioned in column
B of the following Table, not exceeding the amount as mentioned in column C
thereof:
Table
Sl. No.           Nature of sum                   Amount of deduction
A                    B                                   C
1.  Sum paid by the assessee as a tax on Entire amount.
employment as per article 276(2) of
the Constitution, leviable by or
under any law.
2.  Standard deduction.                      (a) ₹ 75000 or the salary,
whichever is less, where income-
tax is computed under section
202(1);
(b) ₹ 50000 or the salary,
whichever is less, in any other
case.
3.    Death-cum-retirement    gratuity Entire amount.
received as referred to in sub-
section (2)(g).
4.    Payment of retiring gratuity Entire amount.
received under the Pension Code or
Regulations applicable to the
members of the defence services.
5.    Gratuity received under the Payment Amount received, as restricted
of Gratuity Act, 1972 (39 of 1972). to the amount calculated as per
the provisions of section 4(2)
and (3) of the said Act.
6.     Any other gratuity received by an        Amount being minimum of—
employee—                                (a) actual gratuity received;
(i) on his retirement; or             (b) amount specified by the
(ii) on his becoming incapacitated    Central     Government,       by
before such retirement; or               notification, having regard to
the limit applicable in this
Direct Taxes Committee                                                          50
CH. IV B.- SALARIES                                                 [Sec 15-19]
Sl. No.             Nature of sum                   Amount of deduction
A                     B                                   C
(iii) on termination     of    his behalf to the employees of the
employment.                          Central Government; and
(c) half month’s salary for each
completed year of service,
calculated as under:—
Amount = 2 (A x B)
where,—
A = average salary for ten
months immediately preceding
the month when any such event
occurs;
B = number of such
completed years.
7.       Payment in commutation of              Entire amount.
pension received—
(a) under the Civil Pensions
(Commutation) Rules of the Central
Government; or
(b) under any similar scheme
applicable to––
(i) the members of the
civil services of the Union or
holders of posts connected with
defence or of civil posts under
the Union, [such members or
holders not covered under (a)];
(ii) the members of the
all-India services;
(iii) the members of the
defence services;
(iv) the members of the
civil services of a State, or the
holders of civil posts under a
State; or
Direct Taxes Committee                                                       51
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                   [Sec 15-19]
Sl. No.             Nature of sum                      Amount of deduction
A                     B                                   C
(v) the employees of a
local authority or a corporation
established by a Central Act or
State Act or Provincial Act.
8.        Payment in commutation of                The commuted value shall
pension is received under any            be determined having regard to
scheme from any other employer.          the age of the recipient, the
state of his health, the rate of
interest and officially recog-
nised tables of mortality, and—
(a) where the employee has
received      gratuity,   the
commuted value of one-third
of the pension, which he is
normally entitled to receive;
and
(b) in any other case, the
commuted value of one-half
of such pension.
9.        Payment in commutation of               Entire amount.
pension received from a fund as
specified in Schedule VII (Table:
Sl. No. 3).
10.        Compensation received by a              Minimum of—
workman at the time of his                  (a) compensation received;
retrenchment—                               (b) amount calculated as
(a) under the Industrial Disputes    per provisions of section
Act, 1947 (14 of 1947); or               25F(b) of the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of
(b) under any other Act or           1947);
rules, orders or notifications issued       (c) such amount, not being
thereunder; or                           less than ₹50000, as may be
(c) under any standing orders; or   notified by the Central
(d) under any award, contract       Government.
of service or otherwise.
11.         In case of compensation referred       Compensation received.
to in Sl. No. 10, where such compen-
sation received is in accordance with
any scheme which the Central
Government may approve in this
behalf, having regard to––
Direct Taxes Committee                                                          52
CH. IV B.- SALARIES                                                    [Sec 15-19]
Sl. No.              Nature of sum                    Amount of deduction
A                      B                                 C
(a) the need for extending special
protection to the workmen in the
undertaking to which such scheme
applies; and
(b) other relevant circumstances.
12.       12Amount received or receivable        Minimum of—
on     voluntary     retirement    or
termination of service under a              (a) compensation received;
scheme or schemes of voluntary            and
retirement, by an employee as
(b) ₹ 500000.
referred to in sub-section (2)(h).
13.       Payment received by an                 Entire amount.
employee of the Central Government
or a State Government as the cash
equivalent of the leave salary in
respect of the period of earned leave
at his credit at the time of his
retirement         whether         on
superannuation or otherwise.
14.      Payment of the nature referred Amount being minimum of–
against serial number 13 received by      (a) the cash equivalent of the
an employee who is not a Central leave salary in respect of the
Government or State Government period of earned leave at his
employee.
credit at the time of his
retirement,       whether        on
superannuation or otherwise
(entitlement of earned leave shall
not exceed thirty days for every
year of actual service);
(b) amount “A”,
where,—
A =10×B;
B = average monthly
salary for the ten months
immediately preceding his
retirement        whether        on
superannuation or otherwise;
12 Rule 20, Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                         53
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                    [Sec 15-19]
Sl. No.            Nature of sum                         Amount of deduction
A                    B                                          C
(c) amount as the Central
Government may, by notifica-
tion, specify in this behalf having
regard to the limit applicable in
this behalf to the employees of
that Government; and
(d) actual payment received.
(2) For the purposes of the Table referred to in sub-section (1),—
(a) in respect of the entries against serial number 6 thereof, if gratuity
or gratuities was or were received from one or more than one employer in
the same tax year (whether or not any gratuity or gratuities was or were
received in any earlier tax year), the aggregate amount of deduction shall
not exceed—
A – B,
where,—
A = the limit specified by the Central Government, by
notification; and
B = the aggregate amount of gratuity or gratuities which was or
were received in any one or more earlier tax years and allowed as an
exemption or a deduction (whether whole or part) from the total
income of any such tax year or years;
(b) in respect of the entries against serial numbers 6 and 14 thereof,
“Salary” includes dearness allowance, if the terms of employment so
provide, but excludes all other allowances and perquisites;
(c) in respect of the entries against serial numbers 10 and 11 thereof,
the following amounts shall be deemed to be compensation received at the
time of retrenchment:––
(i) compensation received by a workman at the time of the
closing down of the undertaking in which he is employed;
(ii) compensation received by a workman, at the time of the
transfer (whether by agreement or by operation of law) of the
ownership or management of the undertaking in which he is employed,
from the employer in relation to that undertaking to a new
employer, if—
(A) the service of the workman has been interrupted by such
transfer; or
Direct Taxes Committee                                                            54
CH. IV B.- SALARIES                                                    [Sec 15-19]
(B) the terms and conditions of service applicable to the
workman after such transfer are in any way less favourable to the
workman than those applicable to him immediately before such
transfer; or
(C) the new employer is, under the terms of such transfer
or otherwise, legally not liable to pay to the workman, in the
event of his retrenchment or compensation on the basis that his
service has been continuous and has not been interrupted by such
transfer;
(d) in respect of the entries against serial numbers 10 and 11 thereof,
the expressions “employer” and “workman” shall have the same meanings
as respectively assigned to them in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947;
(e) the provisions of the entries against serial number 12 thereof shall
be subject to the following conditions:––
(i) the applicable schemes of the said companies or authorities or
societies or Universities or the institutes referred to in clauses (h)(vii)
and (x), governing the payment of such amount are made as per such
guidelines (including, inter alia, criteria of economic viability) as may
be issued in this behalf;
(ii) where deduction has been allowed to an employee in respect
of the said item for any tax year, no deduction thereunder shall be
allowed to him in relation to any other tax year; and
(iii) where any relief under section 157 has been allowed to an
assessee for any tax year in respect of any amount referred to in the
said item, such amount shall not be allowed as a deduction from the
compensation received or receivable in any tax year;
(f) in respect of the entries against serial number 14 thereof, if any
payment on account of cash equivalent of leave salary is received from one
or more than one employer in the same tax year (whether or not any such
payment or payments was or were received in any earlier tax year), the
aggregate amount of deduction shall not exceed—
A – B,
where,—
A = the limit specified by the Central Government, by
notification; and
B = the aggregate amount of payment or payments which
was received in any one or more earlier tax years and allowed as
an exemption or a deduction (whether whole or part) from total
income of any such tax year or years;
Direct Taxes Committee                                                           55
Income-tax Act, 2025                                                  [Sec 15-19]
(g) the death-cum-retirement gratuity referred to in sub-section (1)
(Table: Sl. No. 3) shall be as––
(A) received under the revised pension rules of the Central
Government, or the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 2021; or
(B) received under any similar scheme applicable––
(i) to the members of the civil services of the Union or
holders of posts connected with defence or of civil posts under
the Union (such members or holders being persons not governed
by the said rules);
(ii) to the members of the all-India services;
(iii) to the members of the civil services of a State or
holders of civil posts under a State; or
(iv) to the employees of a local authority;
(h) the schemes of voluntary retirement or termination of service as
referred to in sub-section (1) (Table: Sl. No. 12) shall be for the
employees of––
(i) a public sector company (under a scheme of voluntary
separation); or
(ii) any other company; or
(iii) an authority established under a Central Act or State Act or
Provincial Act; or
(iv) a local authority; or
(v) a co-operative society; or
(vi) a University established or incorporated by or under a Central
Act or State Act or Provincial Act and an institution declared to be a
University under section 3 of the University Grants Commission
Act, 1956; or
(vii) an Indian Institute of Technology within the meaning of
section 3(g) of the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961; or
(viii) the Central or any State Government; or
(ix) an institution, having importance throughout India or in any
State or States, as the Central Government may, by notification, specify
in this behalf; or
(x) such institute of management, as the Central Government
may, by notification, specify in this behalf.
Direct Taxes Committee                                                         56
CH. IV C.- INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY                                       [Sec 20-25]
